The Consul General at Peiping (Clubb) to the Secretary of State
 
893.01/10–1149: Telegram
 
[Document 134]
 
The Consul General at Peiping
 (
Clubb
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Peiping
, October 11, 1949—5 p. m. 
[Received October 12—11:48 a. m.]
 
 
1724. ReContel 1710, October 8. There seems good reason believe Communist leaders truly desire American recognition and regularization relations for both political and economic reasons, which this office has previously outlined. Note that, coincident with bid, since October 1, press has carried little anti-American material (excepting few serial features); First and obvious explanation would be that even anti-American items have been temporarily crowded off pages by 
coverage establishment new government and state of pro-Soviet material. There may, however, also be some real shift in Communist propaganda line to aid People’s Government’s bid for recognition. Communists probably consider bid in itself constitutes important con-cession in terms political tactics (see Contel 848, July 19
16
 for Lo Lung-chi statement that Communists would not sue for recognition), and this should be taken into consideration in estimates of Communist motives. If Communists willing make concessions, reason would, as suggested above, be rooted in political and economic exigencies: They need at least moderately good relations with USA in more ways than one. This, of course, would not 
per se
 indicate any change in over-all political orientation whatsoever, but willingness make concession re propaganda might signify like willingness make others more substantial; and cessation virulent anti-American propaganda would in fact constitute one of posited necessary first steps (Consulate’s reftel; July 19) for smoothing of relations. Matter, of course, still subject to proof, as indicated, but will bear watching. No mention yet noted in Peiping press of Yugoslav recognition. This act probably embarrassing to Chinese Communists.
 
ReContel 1704, October 8, British Consul Graham, acting under instructions, informed Chou in note about October 6 that British Government had matter under study, referred to long history Sino-British relations, proposed that for immediate present “informal relations” be carried on through Consulate representatives. Note unseen, am uncertain of wording. Graham confirms, however, that he was instructed address official communication Chou and says that he therefore addressed Chou with assumed title, but without himself using his own title. (Letter in Chinese only, although Graham says he has since learned his original should have been in English by post-war rule.)
 
UK Consulate still in nonreceipt reply re audience.
 
 
 
Clubb
 
 
 
16
 
Same as telegram No. 1195, 
vol. 
viii
, “Political and military situation in China”, chapter VI
.