The Consul at Shanghai (McConaughy) to the Secretary of State
 
894A.01/9–649: Telegram
 
[Document 421]
 
The Consul at Shanghai
 (
McConaughy
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Shanghai
, September 6, 1949—8 a. m. 
[Received September 5—11:01 p. m.]
 
 
3655. Re Contels 3617, 3652 and 3653.
7
 While part of general Communist propaganda, these editorials merit special attention as reflecting deep and highly aroused suspicion over US intentions re Taiwan. From comments, rumors and queries presented to us almost invariably in our talks with Chinese since takeover, as well as from study of press, it has been clear that local Chinese interest in America’s Chinese policy has been increasingly directed toward Taiwan; that, 
pari passu
 with Communists progress toward conquest mainland and occupation sea coast opposite Taiwan, Communist and third party apprehension re our policy has tended increasingly to center on suspicion that our present future action Taiwan is devoted to active furtherance armed opposition to CCP—if not through support Generalissimo, then through other means (
coup d’etat
, Japanese mercenaries, US Naval base, Chennault fliers, et cetera). Communists conquest Fukien, their growing interest in ending Kmt naval and air operations (staged from Taiwan), implications as to American policy read into White Paper press releases,
8
 and apparently authentic reports re statements by officials American Government re “legalistic” argument Taiwan technically not subject Chinese sovereignty until peace treaty with Japan appear to have combined to bring excitement to crisis reflected in editorial outburst cited.
 
ConGen has heard through several well placed sources that Lo Lung-chi,
9
 upon arrival Peiping, had long discussions with Mao Tse-tung,
10
 in which he vainly attempted persuade Mao of desirability reaching modus vivendi with West democracies. According one source, Mao was adamant there could be no thought of this until America 
abandoned all support Kmt and “her designs on Taiwan”. While we cannot vouch truth this story, we do know that locally manifested Communist hostility to American policy is more and more concerned with Taiwan; and that our “liberal” contacts who have privately ventured occasional mild defense of US in Communist circles, are increasingly anxious for some public statement by American Government on Taiwan which would strengthen their position. Meanwhile difficulty of replying to ever more insistent queries and accusations re Taiwan is becoming embarrassing.
 
While realizing that public clarification our Taiwan policy may be impracticable this stage, ConGen would be grateful for any help Department could give us toward meeting inquiries and charges—inform of either actual indications of policy texts US Government official statements re Taiwan, background information, or suggestions re best means of parrying approaches.
 
Sent Department 3655, repeated Nanking 1915; OffEmb Canton 1080.
 
 
 
McConaughy
 
 
 
7
 
None printed.
8
 
See Department of State 
Bulletin
, August 15, 1949, p. 236; September 5, 1949, pp. 350 ff.
9
 
A leader of the Democratic League.
10
 
Chairman of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party.