The Chargé in China (Atcheson) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/2–2045: Telegram
 
[Document 169]
 
The Chargé in China
 (
Atcheson
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Chungking
, February 20, 1945—3 p.m. 
[Received 4:35 p.m.]
 
 
258. Embassy’s telegrams 245–6–7, February 18, and subsequent telegram[s]
8
 regarding Communist negotiations. Following is extract from transcript of Yenan broadcast of February 17: 
 
 
“According historical results of Crimea Conference,
9
 Yenan 
Emancipation
 daily editorial today pointed out that ‘at San Francisco international conference Kuomintang dictatorship government should at most be permitted to send only one-third representatives to conference while other two-thirds should be representatives of Chinese Communist Party, Chinese Democratic League and noted non-party figures representing broad masses of liberated China, occupied China and Chungking controlled areas’. Editorial hoped that this important point would receive due consideration of three great Allies, America, Soviet Russia and Great Britain. It is honor to Chinese people to be invited to sponsor United Nations Conference at San Francisco on April 25, editorial said. ‘This is result of 7½ years of war of Chinese people against Japanese invaders, especially of heroic fighting of army and people of liberated areas behind enemy lines. But though we are among United Nations there is up till now no democratic coalition government able to represent all classes and strata of entire Chinese Nation and all party groups. There is only oligarchic, one-party, dictatorship government of Kuomintang. This government which has made no real war effort against Japan, which is hopelessly corrupt and incompetent, which is anti-democratic and anti-popular, certainly cannot represent will of people of China’. We Chinese people warmly celebrate successful conclusion of Crimea Conference and warmly welcome its decisions. Statement of leaders of three great powers greatly strengthen[s] our belief in an early victorious conclusion of our struggle against Japan and that defeat of Japanese Fascism will soon follow defeat of Naziism. At same time statement of leaders of three powers strengthens our confidence in democracy and formation of coalition government and is blow to those disciples of Fascism intoxicated by one-party dictatorship.”
 
 
 
 
 
Atcheson
 
 
 
8
 
No. 248, February 18, not printed; for telegram No. 249, February 19, see p. 234 
[
Pg. 234 includes portions of 
Doc. 166
 and 
Doc. 167
]
.
9
 
See 
 
Foreign Relations
, The Conferences at Malta and Yalta, 1945, pp. 966
 ff.