’ 


Die reece 


iat 


LET US PHOTOGRAPH YOUR. 


FRANCIS WU'S 


GLOUCESTER ARCADE . 


|| WEDDING 


STUDIO. 


_No. 33731. 


~ 70 FIGHT CRISIS 


Mr; Attlee’ Given Labour’s 
Vote Of Confidence 


4 


’ The belief that Britain's 


« Germany, the Midd’ Bast and 


~ stupldly 
_ stlves.” and we commentator in 


not wait until aid is 
Marshall plan, that a 


London, July 30. 
economic situation can- 
forthcoming under the 
decision on cuts in the 


Armed Forces will be made in the next 48 
hours and that the Prime ‘Minister, Mr. Cle- 
ment Attlee, will-establish a five-man “battle 
“squad” to fight the economic crisis, is express- 


ee ed in some sections of 
Today's private 
Labour Pz 


Montyomcry, Chief of 


Stall, to return to England immediate 


Thitt han heightened the ter. 
sion, expressed dn the press, 
which is now félt in Britain, 

References were nade toa 
coulition oyvovernment, the cat- 
ting Of Britinh armed Corees tn, 


+ the Suez Canal Zune, aad) possi- 
ble Government changes, 
The Bebo rewspaper, the! 
“Daily Herud’: however, sug 
Reated that the prophets “have 
over-reached them. 


the Communist "Daily Worker" 
fmpied theta “manufactured 
stock market panie’ was de- 
slned to nehieve “coalition as | 
Ma ultimate objective." 

The = Parliamentary Corres. 
pondent of the Londem “Times” 
wrote; . 

“Labour Members, ike Mem- 
bers or othen partion, are dls 
turbed and anxteus about the 
outlook, ‘ 

“Ufsthe Prime Miniater Is 
prepared to be difluenced by the 
strong views of some af his, 
party collcagucn.. le may decide 


© on some cliinges in the Govern- 


ment in the nenp future," | 
. The “Daily Herat” ins its 
editorial said; "The onti-Gov- 
ernment clamour in a large see. 
tion of the press will not de-! 
celye the publie.”-—Reuter. : 


Miners To.Work An | 


Extra Hour? 

My, Attlee won on virtual vote 
of confidence from Labour ment- 
dere of Parliament today after 
explaining to them the “brawl 


“TOR OF Dis plan for meeting Bri- 


© Britain's miners ty work an extra 


« 


British 


tain’, deepening econ mip erists. 
A bullets dened after thw 
meeting said the rembere hid ex: 
Preased the complete salbsfaetion 
ef the Party’ with the Premier's 
statement ait added “the mem- 
bers assured him of the  unitet 
support cof othe | Parliamentary 
party (the Labour MPs) in all 
the measure, which the Govern: 
ment thought jt neeessary to take, 
_ Details of the explanations 
whieh he made were not made 
public, but the bulletin jseucd ail | 
he would explain his plan in) the: 
House ef Commons next week, 
Earlier, a well-informed source 
anid Mr, Attlee wautd call tpon 


hour daily to increuse the pro- 
duction cf critienty needed coal, 
the principal prop of the nation’s 
srembling economic structure, Mr, 
Attlee will aucgest | time-und-a- 
half pay for the overtime. Luter | 
in the day, Mr. Attlee wan sche- 
duled to confer with leuders of 
tho National Union of Mine 
Workery.—Associated Proxy, 


New Estimates 


Unconfirmed reports were cur.| toms, now Hes in the hauds of] asserted thn 


rent In Brithsh 
circles tonight that the Cabinet 
had called upon ol! service chicts 
to make-o new estimate of thelr 
absolute minimum requirements: 


° 


today’s British press. 


mecting of the Parliamentary 
rly discussed the economic situation 
and the decision of Field) Marshal Viscount 


the Imperial General . 


ly. . 

4. The shortage of mon.power 
in some of Britain's moat vital 
industries, notably con) mining, 
hoy clenrly led to the suggestion 
that mon should be released fron 
the forces for work In ‘these In. 
dustries, 

When the Executive of 
Nationnt Mine Workers 
seen the Prime Minister, Mr, 
Clement Attlee, today they are 
expected to suggest that service 
in the mines should be admitted 
as an alternative to conscript ser. 
vice in the forces for young 
people,—-Reuter, 


155 Arrests 


In Rangoon 


Rangoon, July 30, 
The Government announced 
today that 165 persona have 
been arrested following the as- 
sassinations of members of the 
Rurmese Executive Councll, and 
indicated that trial will be held 

soon, Cee uae 
The, announcement said the 
country had remained calm dur- 


the 
Union 


ing the assassination crisis, It]. 


sald that courts had been set up 
fo investigate how the slayers 
obtnined army — equipment.— 


i United Press, 


Peace 


Eviencion OF 


Gauthier 


 Cold-Blooded Murder . Of 


5-MAN BATTLE SQUAD! =z: 


British : Sergeants . 


The Irgun Zvai 


Leurnl 
“communique” asserting that 
sergeants who were kidnapped o 


Jerusalem July 30. -. 
sued today a. 
‘two British _ 
Suly.12 had 


been hanged in a .forest near Natanya in re- 
prisal for the exccution of three of its members 


at Acre Prison on Tuesd: 


ay. 


Shortly after the “communique” was {issued 
from Tel-Aviv, 2- Police source’ reported that 


the bodies of the two soldiers 


Associated Press, 


The 


Plan To Far 


Travancore 
To Join ~ 
Hindustan 


Trivandrum, July 30. 


Travancore has decid- 
ed to join the Dominion 
of India, subject to cer- 
tain conditions, it was 
understood -here last 
night. 

‘Nhe conditions were said to 
concern defence, foreign affairs 
ana communications. 

This decivion by the Mahara- 
jah, it was understood, was the 
result of recent negotiations 
tand discussions in New De'hi 
between Lord Mountbatten, the 
Viceroy, and the Dewan (Prime 
Minister) of Travancore, 

Travancore was the first In- 
diun state to declare its Inde- 
pendence after the | ostablish- 
ment of the two dominions’ of 
awe and Pakistan on August 
Sip C.P., Ramaswamy Aiyar, 
the Dewan, was Inst week at- 
tacked and wounded by ‘an 
Indian after attending a State 
centonary celebration.—Reuter, 


|Dr. Evatt On Japan 


Treaty | 


Tokyo, July 30. 


Dr. Herbert V. Evatt, Australian Minister for Ex- 
ternal Affairs, now in Tokyo, said today that 
there should be no delay in drafting the Jap- . 


anese peace treaty 
be done early in-1948. 
Evatt said the obj 
should be twafo. 


id: A. 
sion which “ 


which, he beligved, could 


ectives of the peace treaty 


security against aggres- 


we have just suffered”; and 2. "the 


‘peace and welfare of all Pacific peoples.” - 


‘ 


Fatshan 
Confiscation 
“Danger’’ 


The fate of the China Naviga- 
tion Company's river stcamer, 
“Fntshan,” detained in Canton 
by the Chinese Maritime Cus- 


Labour Party) the Inapector-General of Cua-| effort entitles 


toma,.the “Chinn Mail” was told 
by a reprenentative of the Com- 
pany yesterday. ' 

Chinese pregs despatches from 


“The foundations of peace 
Huve also been laid through the 
constructive ploneer work — al- 
ready done by Gen, MacArthur,” 


‘he said, adding that the funda- 


menta's were: already accepted 
in the basi¢ policy formulated 
by the Far Eastern Commis- 
sion. ‘ 


‘ 


Speaking at a luncheon of the 
Tokyo Correspondent Club—the 
organisation of foreign correa- 
pondents in Ja ; 
t Australlo’s * war 
her to be re- 
coxnized as a “party principa!” 
in the peace settlement. 


He supported ‘the .United 


+fn the light of “Britaln’s eritient| Canton yesterday sald that Can-] States proposed. voting proce- 


. Shortage of foreign exchange. 
There reports were given some 
seredenco fn political quarters on 
‘. the following grounds: 60°" 5 
1. Pressure for . reduction of 
military . commitments 
‘abrond, ‘originally confined to Jeft 
wing critics of Mr. Ernest Hevin's 
» foreign policy, has: steadily ” in. 


Payments deficit, 
, year to be in the re, 
400,000,000." , 


ton Customs officials regard the 
finding of the ‘large amount of 
contraband goods on the ‘Fat- 
shan” us .a very serious matter 
in view of tho fact that's simi- 
lay cuse occurred previous'y in- 
volving a ship of the same com- 


The despatche: 
@ steamer was 


capital. are | 
ing. \f 


dure of two-thirds of all the 11 
member’ ‘nations. of ‘the’ Far 
Enstern Commission as “just 
dnd democratic.”. - +” 

' Any attempt to apply the -veto 
system, such -an- at. the) Paris 


conference for German‘satellite |: 


Lt.-General Albert C. Wedéem 


had been found. 


a 


Marshall 


‘ Shanghai, July 30. 
eyer’s mission to 


China is a prelude to the extension of the Mar- 


Shall Plan to the Far East, asserted 


editor-in-chief of the 


; interview with Central News 
The guilding principle of the Marshall Plan,- 


Owens pointed out, is 


themselves. “ According “‘to this 


H. Owens, 
ore Sun,” in an: 
today. 


“Baltim 


to help those who help 
principle, 


countries are at the outset required to get to- 
gether and form a plan‘of.their own. which 


they will present to the - United 


prospective helper. 

General Wedemeyer's —chicf 
assignment here, besides finding 
facts, js to find out how far the 
Chinese Government 43 prepared 
to go In meeting Uncle Sam's re- 
quirements, the visiting editor 
sald. Of course, he added, the 
United States Government will 
ace to it that every cent of its 
moncy will be spent in a manner 
i¢ desires. , 

Touching upon the question of 
peace possibilities {in China, 
Owens sald: “I don’t think it is 
possible for the Chinese Central 
Government to form a coalition 
government participated ir by all 
parties, including the Commun. 
(sts, as long as the latter insist 
on maintaining an army of their 
own Oe tied eb | 
Recalling General George C, 


+ Marshall's efforts a few. mcaths 


ago to bring about a coalition 
government in China. Owens re- 
marked that the failure of Gen- 
etal ‘Mershall’s mission was at. 
tributable to the Communist 
refusal to give up thely army; 
In favour of a national army 
under a caallition government, 
Owens claimed General Douglas 
MacArthur's occupation polley In 
Japon nz a “complete .success” 
mainly due to: (1) the Allied 
Supreme. Commander's 


‘ 
‘ 


_ States, their 


Australia 
Gives 


The Lead | 


‘+. CANBERRA, JULY 30. 

PREMIER J.B, CHIFLEY TO. 
DAY ANNOUNCED THAT AUS. 
TRALIA HAD DIRECTED HER 
REPRESENTATIVE IN THE 
UNITED NATIONS SECURITY 
COUNCIL TO DRAW THE 
COUNCIL'S ‘ATTENTION TO 
THE INDONESIAN SITUATION 
UNDER ARTICLE. THREE jOF 
THE ‘UNO CHARTER. . 

Article Three in the world 
charter provides that the Security 
Counci! “shal! determine 
existence of uny threat to the 
peace, breach of peace or act of 
aygrcrsion, and shall make re. 


7 the ¢murder 


the; 


. | Faz LH pininba at 


YEAS 


Jerusalem, July 30." 


Haganah, self - styled 
Jewish National Defence 
Army, had failed in an 
intensive all-night search 
to find the two. British 


sergeants, 

Hundreds of Haganoh mem- 
bers, ignoring a Britlah dusk- 
to-dawn curfew, combed through 
the gard dunes ond citrus 
oie Ot the northern coastal 
pluin inthe Natanya area inva 
fruitless hunt for Sgt. Clifford 
Martin and Mervin Palce of the 
British Army. ‘ 

The search apparently was 
spurred by growing fears 
among a large part of Paicatine 
Jewry that the the British au- 
thoritiea would clamp down a 
wideaprenad curfew if the Irgun 
carried out its threat—Asaccint- 


ed Press. ; 
Tried as “Spies” 


The Irgun today issued a cam- 


’ 


| munique announcing that the two 


toldiers were executed ox “spies” 
after n trial-in which they asked 
for clemency, but vere . turned 
down, ‘ 4 
An official announcement said 
the bodies of the sergeants: wero 
found -hanging from trees {n the 
Government forest on the Sharon 
coastal plain.—United Pross. 


“Legal Action” | 
i : Later. 
The Irgun communique stated 
the “tyto British spies, Martin and 
Paice, wore found guilty in a triat 
of unlawful entry int Palestine, 
‘membership in-a’ British terrorist 
sorganiaation -catled’..the British: 
‘occupation. army, responsible --for 
and suppression of 
ews.” ae 
The Irgun doclared’the hang- 
ings were hot in retaliation for 
the execution of the three Irgun- 
isth but wero'the rosult of “nor- 
mal" legul actlon which it -pro- 
| poses to tako ngalbst the British 


commendations or decide what!) occupation forces.—United Press. 


measures shall be taken, 
maintain or restore interna 
peace and security.” 

In nnnouncing his Government's 
intention_to bring .the mutter. be- 
fore the Security, Council, Premier 

chifley . sald: “Australia tnkes 


to 
al 


this aetion 10 days ufter the con- 


f life, : 

a for ax my observation 
goo,” Oweng said, “the Japantso, 
unlike the Germans, are very hard 
working, cooperative and even 
subservient, They carry out every 
wort uttered by General Mae- 
Arthur. Tho only exception I 
know of ix tho ealo by Japanese 
Peasants of rationed rice on the 
blackmarket, which is illegal.— 
Central Nows. ‘ oe 


New. Zealand 
Demonstration 


- Wellington, N.Z:, July 80. 

"The police seized banners’ and 
took names when 160 atunenta 
from the ‘Socialist | Club’ ’ of 
Victoria . University stoged 9 
dentonstration here. today 


pan—Dr. Evatt | against, the.. Dutch ' action -.{n 


Indonesia, Thero'}was ‘no” die- 
order, however. : * . : 
| The students, : bearing. antl- 
Dutch slogans marched to Tho 
Netherlands ‘Legation and then 
to the grounds of Parliament 
Building. <0 ( 
' The Nethor‘ands: Minister do- 
clined «to , recelve ‘the ; delega- 
tion, declaring that it was “in- 
tolerable” that “demonstrations 
should be made ag 
misafions.—-Robuter: 


HEY 


THE WEATHER | 


Pressure remalos. high over, the central 

N Pacific, and Is ow over the. whole of 

nd Manchuria. There ard: stitas | 

of ew shallow’ depression over the 8 “part 

of the Eastern Bea, from yhich'a' trough: 
of umdderately low. pressure extends BE 


ehowsrs, continuing 
+ Yeaterday’s . Weatheri— 
1 deg. Fab. 
eg.’ Fah, 
Teafnfallsy £6 
d ince. Jam. 


foreign |. 


flict commenced in Indonesin be. 
cause Jn‘ accordance’ with Article. 
Three of the world ‘charter the 
parties to any dispute are obliged 
first of all to seck a solution by 
negotiation or medlation. 
Strenuous attempts have —beon 
made fn consultation with other 

vernments, particularly 
Uhited Kingdom, the’ United 
Stotes, and India, to bring about 
n solution In this way. However, 
it le. felt that further deloy Is not 
justified because of the loss of 
Mite belng sustained.”—Assoclated 
Press, s 


US. Support 


') Washington, July 20. 

~A Staté Department official sal$ 
today that the United States 
“probably would: support. the In- 

n domand for Unlted ‘Nations 
action to bring a peaceful . In- 
donesian gottlement,’ an: 

This did not necessarily moan 
tha United’ States would ‘support 
the ‘Indian argument’ exactly sos 
advanced. ‘The Indians may call 
for’. action: .atronger than. tho 
United ‘Stat nd British . are. 
willing to .upport .untit a more 
moilerato approach has been tried. 
* Britain: and ‘America,. fn con- 
vorsutions of 


, to“ that’ 
the “United States 


the |° 


Fascist Leaflets’ 
In--Rome------- 


Rome, July 29., 

A IJarge, quantity of neo-Fas- 
clat !eaflets wana strewn in, the 
streots of Rome in commemora- 
ston of Mussolini's. birthday to- 
day. rae: fe 

The teaflets had “Long Live 
July 29” printed dingonally and 
a continuouw “Long Live our 
Happy Day" along the edges. 

The po'ice confiscated huge 
‘uantities of other neo-Faxcist. 
leaflets, Squads were searching 
for the authors, whom the po- 
ifee described. .as “nostalgic 
youths.”—United Press: 


FROM. VACATION 
TO VACATE - 


. Stockholm, July 30, , 
* Well-informed’ politics! quar- 
ters sald last night that, the 
Swedish Forelgn: Office has ‘re- 
quested ‘Moscow to reca'l 'Rus- 
sian Military Attache Konov 
and another. -momber of the 
Legation. staf? named. -Mihailov 
because of their “vacation” in 
a Swedish. military . region on 
the Finnish border near Torne- 
delen,—United . Press. ne, 


Soong A 


‘Shanghai, July:30.. <".. 


It was leurned fiom circl 


TET IT IN! Ren Pacem pe 


.| ments.—Reuter, - 


.Jwould recognize Ditch 


We Buy and Bell 2 


TYPEWRITERS. 
’ CALCULATING MACHINES *.'. 
also Anything aud ‘Everything, - 
for OF FICH MACHINE.’ 
*F eallnt Sareioe 2s 
Hongkong Typowriter Exchange 
9, D’Aguilar Ht ‘Wal. 31488 


MALANG’S FALL : 


~~ PREDICTED 


Batavia, July 29. 


"Reports fromthe war fronts in Indonesia today . 


told of a continued Dutch advance from Tegal, 
west of Semarang, in Java, while the carly 
fall to the Dutch forces of Malang, seat of the 
_ Republican Provisional’ Parlament, was pre- 
dicted by neutral observers, : \ 
Malang was said to be threatened by a Dutch en- 
circling movement. A Republican communi- 
ue said that a few miles south of Malang, 
epandjen had been attacked by Dutch forces, 


who, it was claimed, were repulsed. 


Other reports [tom Jogjokorin! These nources hedged on mnk- 
sald that the situation of Malang | ing ovt-anc out predictions that 
had “returned to normal” nfter|the Dutch war machine would 
the repulse of Dutch spear-hends,| he hated, however, ‘pointing 
north of the city. iy our, that the Republican 

Fighting which began at dawn | “scorched carth"” policy might 
today continued all day . round] force the Dutch to continue 
Thitfatengka. their march<-United Press. 


The communique, confirming 
;two Dutch ailr-ralds on the Jog. 
fakartn alrfeld today, sald thot |. 
| two people were killed when one 
| of the attacking planes dropptd 
arenades, and strafed Klatan near 
Surakaorta (on the railway north. 
eastwards to Sourabaya), Pana. 
son and Bojolall In the Surnkarta 
district were also ritnck.” 


“BRITAIN'S 
GESTURE. 


London, July 30. . 
The British Gov- 

- ernment have = sus- 
pended all military’ 
supplies and facili- | 
‘ties to the Nether- 
lands authorities in 
.the Far East, Mr. 
Ernest Bevin, For- 
eign Secretary, stated 


Dutch troops from seven ships 
Innded nt TJermin, 40 miles from 
Tebingtinggi, In the Medan aren 
.of Sumatra = yesterday, according 
to a broadcart today over the 
Republican radio, - 

The radio sald that the land. 
ings were resisted. Two Dutch 
aircraft supported the landing, 


A Dutch military spokesman in a Parliamentary 
at the Hague todoy snid: “AIr 


reply today.—Reuter. 
Tudonesian forces surrendering to . 
the Dutch are disarmed and sent . 


Some observers huve gait that 
the Republicans were destroying - 


tute, 


home, except for dangerous ele. S h d 

Jogjakarta Raid A ee ey 

: Batavia, July 30. E th. H t 

Dutch planes were over Magoc- |. ar : LU Ss : 

wo alnport. at Jogjakarta. axain “ou. j ot 

today, an Indonesian communique ry Hs 

reported, * he wy Ne a) : 

. Indonesian aptiaircra Ara Hie L , : 0 

one Dutch plano’as they strafe Data i uly ov, 

ee eicinale. Dutdh. fiphte aia e Dutch ‘ast Indies 

fi cia asda 

bombed Unlang, mountain. resort Gove ment has already’. 

in East Java, the Indonesian on- |assured| ‘China’ that. it 

nouncement sald. Ja . . iy + 5 i ‘ On" 
. roy | Will do its utmost: to pre- 

The Indonesiana’ also reported [""* ‘ sae 
tholr ee alrcraft fade ane ue destruction, 
cessful” attack yesterday on_Am- |o 1inese. © property 
barawa in the path of the ‘Dutch . 7 : : 
Jund force werking southward during | the Indonesian 
from, Tegal in Central Java— | fighting, Dutch . sources 
United Press. : here said . 

A ioe Seether In pO oS ee re . 
wast. Java, ay-sold.Dutch- troops |. .,.4.- eco itis 
with Amerlenn-mnde tanks and | 1 43 impossible ‘to. estimate thé 

Chinese losses but it is understood | 
fleld guns moved out cf Lawang 
at cun-up and officers forecast the | that they already amount to 
eapture by nightfall of Malang. {many millions of guilders, the 

.This report sald the forces | Principal destruction has been to 
passod nt least three villages | the Chinese residential sections — 
destroyed by the Republicans in| of towns occupled by the Dutch, 
lino with their “scorched carth” | rice factories and to Chinese pro. 
policy: and there were reports | duce stocies, : 5 
Malang would he found in aj -+- 4 
similnr stoto.—Associntdd Press. 

Mediation Move “| Chinese property because of the 

Se ; {fear that the Chinese would sell 

., The Hague, duly 29. | the. produce -to ‘the: -Dutch, : thus: 

.: We'linformed but wnoficial) assisting ‘them to obtain: foreign 

sources Bald today that Holland credits, needed for the economic 

was .rendy to accept Britain's} cohabilitation’ of the ‘occupied 
offer to mediate to end the In-} areas, *- ; 
dohesian war if the Indonesians | ‘ o . : 

Kovcr-| The people: of Batovio, stated 

elgnty over the whole country) government headquarters in Java, 

and jf the Republicans would | were warned today that cholera, 

issue an immediate cease-fire ‘perms were missing’ ‘from’ tie 

order, ie, 

The Mae our ed atl . , 
meanwhi'c, feels that military | - ve ; : 
action -has “accomplished .-ite ithe, gérme—-thought to be parll. 
initial alms and the ‘time has | cularly virulent—wore believed to 
come for renewed negotiations. | have disappeared on July 24 when 
The Labourites’ aro- said ta | the Dutch” police ‘took’ the "in. 
favour calling In ‘both. British | stitute’s. senlor. research’ sclontist, 
and Americans to negotiate ‘a | DF. Djuhang, ‘brother-in-law’ of 
“peace acttlement. : 


- - Sutan Sjahrir, into’ custody, . 

sa ata ‘| | thd: government “has” warned 
err “| the. ‘population — 
Kung [Sg 


es close to. T..V. Soong::| 


‘and H, H,- Kung today. that they were ‘prepar- 
.. ing’a:statement countering the allegations ‘in’ 


--:the ‘Central Daily: 
. Fuchung Corporatio 


ing . Corporation—the..;. so-called 


family’: 
‘The, statemen rtedly, for 


ald 


News ‘report: accusing the 


and the Yangtze; ‘Trad- 
privileged pare 
od'b ‘Bavld-Koni mone “of LH 
Kung; ‘was ‘granted jonly -US$1,- 
080,000: nt ‘the’ official rate 


dig 
Se orreapine 


city’s bacteriological research. In- - - 


4 the . Indonesian | x:premfer,. Dr. 


to ‘drinks only :. z 


a Page 2 21, at ae : : Lf THE CHINA MATL, THURSDAY, -JULY -31,: +1947. ae 


READERS Lerrens | Thousatid £ Dollars In Fiieg On 


Wer Memoria pnd. er Learner D pte ad eee 
ytd haba : TWO ACCIDENTS IN] | QUAINT 


Sir,—with ‘P| P corres: fqmillar to us all, but that] August 2—Douglas SS. Co, Lia, 
ance whieh han taken place ( fumillarity must not induce us| annual meeting, 11 am, . : “London July 20. 
pondene 


CONSPRACY ath ce 


Dr, Lim’ Ek.Q uee, Medical Officer of Shamshui 
Publie Dispensary; and Ho Chui, cddlie at Loa 
same. Dispensary,. were. acquitted: by Mr, W.-H 


‘ 


» Press referring to theta forget om duty, to the -re-}| August 7—HK & Kowloon Whart pes : _ Mra, Marie’ Louise ‘Seales Latimer at’ Kowloon yesterday of conspirin 

TCP tad Fund, 1 would] fatives of the victima, she Head oe fut we naneucan es ae dauphtér of He Afrieun rad. yy He use Dr. Lim’s. fo ition to demand oe 
‘ j se | fy 7 e- _ venturor, Tradtr : in 

Nes nh dal ab Me ty Lt 1 ee ee our] HK. Council of Women, YWCA. today | sha had ‘boughé. an der to obiain, an f bd ey patients in, OF. 
tO eee aed auppart of the! duty to the dead If we do not] Duddell St, 6.15 pm. Pleading iy t to six charges in connection Sih anctent diaused tighthouee, five Giving hin verdi referential treatment 
preatly inereased sup August 122—HK & S'hal Hotels t fii miles from ‘Hull for £60 ving his verdict, His Wor-) ductor, in, onder, that pationts 
Fund. The Fund ja not reeelyeldo all in our power to assist | Aud rt two traffic accidents, Wan: Yuk-tong, 10 Hili- where she apd veoh vabant hip declared: “There . is no} whend of her might go In first. - 
Ing the support fram the publie! the bereaved. With the cost of) annual meeting, noon, + wood Road, top floor, was fined $1,050 by Mr.| would ive because they were | case for defendanta to answer. "Dealing ek the question ae 
which ff should and, indeed.] living so high In the Colony, the roeereooeoess W. A, Blair-Kerr at Kowloon yesterday. tired | of reanectable retiramont. _{¥ miuat, however, soy that I be-| conaplrac Mr. Silva ‘quoted 
whieh it oust) reeelves Uf] minimum assistance required in f wy ' She -addéd: 1 alwiye "| eye the Doctor wan doing pri- Lib hori rt: 
material help ix to be given tof each eae is 6150 p.m,—in some After sentenco was pasacd, teanted to Uv in & something vate practice contrary to hin rumeroun authaitien 49 sippart 
those coming within the pros; enaee, this Ja altogether ine Jas F or he defendant asked for an adjourn. | - quatat, call itesd Prem, agreement with the Government.| po’ ne ERED EMICY "whan i wor 


vindona of the Scheme who are] adequate, The Committee bere: 


ment, #tuting that he waa not ‘ 14 camnmond. that thls We 

In urgent nec of asaistance. | fore makes this urgent agpeal satisfied with the verdict. and Sino- Brit ish biurlt to the AN oiton of the fie Te Gulste at Ais HOBBS 
Generous amounts have, i bafance more to everyone, partl- la ey wanted {co instruct a solicitor. Metical Authorities ne tes rea en ae le ner 

» true, beep donated by a number] cularly those who have not al-{ Rejecting the requeat, Mr, Revue. t. “T have: no- doubt that if al The Major eee The Private: 
fesucllngt firma iu the} ready given, to subscribe to the Mr. . Simmonds, of| Blair-Kerr to'd defendant that Chub” 9 


of tht complete ‘investigation had nee “Our not to oklon why, Ours 


Colony Lut the number of ine} and and to subseribe an quick- the Hong Pas and China Gaa| he hid pleaded~ guilty and had been made, the case would not! io i. 
dividen! menthers of the public} ly an, Leela et Co,, Ltd., suid yesterday that] declared that he had nothing to Fleet C lub- kave‘coma to the Court." mon tn Ho, Chul a a 
who save sabsacribed ia disnape SH, WILLLAMS. reporta that the whole Happy! #ay excepting that he was not AG Veet’ : Before making his Submiaston no ‘option but to obey: the in- 
palntiijdy small, There may Chairman, Valley arca will have gas with-| acquainted with the TrafMfle Ie- { Ss that Dr. Lim hnd no ‘ease to ; > A 

War Memorin) Fund 1th Combined ervices e 0! structions of Dr. Lim who was 
he opeme whe ure ounnble to ur Memoria! 1 in two weeks were unfortunate- | #tldtions. * Hho ,| auewer, Mr. Marcus da Silva re-| jy, change, af. th pensary . 
titont mere thon $6 or $10 Committee. fy Inaccurate. If you are not satisfied with . ‘ Entertainments, _ who. quested’ permission to recal! “Might By Wrohe 
‘thelr mamber rust | be vers. * * - He told the “China Mail” that| the sentence,” went on tin Wor- : have lost the .usé: of the | psi y.mM. Morrison In order to Fi De 
few) and who think that smalt yan will be available from to-| 8p, “you are at Hberty to ap-| AT THE FIRST ANNUAL Th t ~ | claify a statement he made in What the: Doctor sa sald 

-  Hafr-Raisin lew, 1 t a'low | GE “'MEETIN Star Theatre, are to con y Mr, Sliva, Win to fytrol 

Amount chin make no materkaly alr-Kaising day to a small xoction of Happy | Ply for a review, 1 cunnot alow |GENERAL’ MEETING OF THE hi the couree of his evidence on| Mt: va, won to roduce a ; 
Witterenes ty the Bund and) gip,— Tale about apltting! Tt Valley. you bail now. | You must pay | SINO.BRITISH CLUB HELD IN tinue their ‘activities in Monihy. DSL Morrison then ayatem which" he could’ upet..at 
therefore do vot contribute, Buel nad a most hale raising and re- It yoann be a month before} your fines first.” : ST. JOHN'S HALL YESTERDAY, Hong Kong, i 4 using tho atated that accused asked him Posie ey wanna ae a aht be 


The charges ‘against Wan, a| MR. PR. ROWELL, . HONG China Fleet Club Thea- on the ferry, “I wonder Whether 
learner-driver, were dangerous} KONG'S DIRECTOR OF EDUCA. { Mr. Si ; ill all t 
driving at Hillwood Road near| TION,- WAS - UNANIMOUSLY | tre as’ their principal /if Mr. Shaftain will allow me to 
Nathun oud at 6.15 p.m. on| ELECTED CHAIRMAN OF. THE headquarters. - resign?” 

July 24; and at Tam Kung Round} CLUB FOR THE ENSUING’ ‘A fast-moving revue “Out and Recal'ed, DSI. Morrison’ nd- 
near Sung Wong Toi, Kowloon | YEAR. . About". wil] open the shows at| mitted that on May 28 Dr, Lim 
City on July, 29; one count of | “Mr. Ma Man-fai wos re-clected| the new: theatre, commencing on | aaked him at the Dispensary for 
being | unaccompanied by a} Vice-Chairman, concurrently act-j'Monday, next at 7.30 -p.m. . | the name of the Police officinl, 
licensed driver; and two charges | ing as Chinese Scerctary; and| The C.F.C. Theatre caters for | hé interviewed on: May 22, He 
of failing to ‘splay the, “L"| Major Opie, , Forces Education| arr audience of 540° and “hon an | admittede having written down 
plates at the front and.renp of }OMcer, was re-elected Engllah; additional” advantage over ‘the | “SSP © Shaftain, OBE,” on 9 


such cums, when the corres-) yolting experience the other day) parts of. Village Road, Yuk Sau 
ponding donation from Govern-| whilst croaing Pedder Street] Street, King Kwong Street, and 
ment ia added, mount up quick- to go over” to the Hongkong] Shan Kwong Road—the main 
Iv. t would therefore like tol tote, : Happy Valley aorea—can have’ 
Btiesk Chat all-donntionsa, how- A well dressed modern Chin-| gis, ° 
ever small, are weleome, ese girl was riding past in a Mr. Simmonds said that it 
Applications for asstatance! piekshaw golng towards | fs hoped to have the entire dis- 
reneh the Committee daily but) Queen's Roud, Suddenty, she} trict, Including Bluepool Road, 
owinyt mainly to the uncertainty | joing aver and — expectorated | fully supplied by the end of the 
ge to the amount oat our dis-| which Jancded a perfect target] year, 


wrong, but {t Was not up to Ho 
Chui to questfon it. 

- His Worship: “There. has 
beon no evidence or even sug- 

j Seaton that there has been any- 
one who wanted to see tha Doc- 
tor and was unable ‘to do 0, 
and so, wis seriously affected. 
The Doctor hos frankly admit- 
ted that he was underpaid:and ' 


posal, ween only make pay-] on my lapel, | was so astonish. He pointed out that there are 7 H is : 3 theeoe 
ments fora period of G months] ed that it stunned me for a mo-| still several areas in the Col his car 22 ecretary, Star, in, that ere $s.;,0 Bur | plece of ‘paper. . did some private practice. He 
ahenil wren that, they wil! be tee t wlunned me fo without Ras, ineludini. colony In the absence of Col, Clarke,| available ‘before and atter 'the| Mere. Hearsay had been very honest. in thia 


* ided over b: rformance. " 

Offer To Woman the meeting was pres ¥ | pe Th hia submission, Mr. Silva| Court. 

the Vice-Chairman, Mr. Ma Man.| The revie is open to botn: declared. that, the prosecution's}: Mr. A.S.C, Comber, for Ho 

W.J.D.| fi, who gave a brief review of Services and civilians, the .dIl-| cuss, aecepted at ita highest! Chul, submitted that his eftent 

i the activities of the club, Tribute| ference in charges being solely on value, did not amount to aj wua a coolle doing comparative. 

§ paid to the Army who, said] account of entertainment tax. : oe 

Office, auld that on the evening | Wa* Pal ATO) { charge of accepting money from| ly minor clerical: work. ; 

of July 24 defendant was re ee ie ene oad | Aaya Ce DOCK tr ud) ard | Patients .in order to give them| His Worship held that both 

the reeiplents, Taxi rank, a tram passed me] Mr, and Mrs. OL. Blown, of| Ing at a very fast speed along pnaes Chalprenn stag ene crite wie ¢ 50. $1.80--and 80 preferential treatment. accused had no case to answer, 
It has heen suggested that it! and to my horror a similar Mollers; have taken up residence | Nathan Rord, towards the Star! ice the Club a success, it waa! cents. for the Services and $3, The cyidehcee of Tam, a wo-] ana they were accordingly ace 

would be helpful if-a target thing happened. Someone from| in -the Peninsula Hotel, Other} Ferry, when he suddenly awer- necesspry for all mentbers ‘te stir] $1.90 und $1.00°for of 00-for cfvillans. man patient, was mere'y hear- oe . 

figure ot whieh we should aint] the top of the tram landed an-} new urivals are Mr, and) Mts,j ved into Hillwood Road, A up people and get them take ao ens. ee ee Hol Payee ae ‘ 


“owas naned, It ia impossible tof ether “beauty on my turbant!]13/T.W, Stewart, of the Malayan} lady with her daughter and a Rreater interest In the ‘regular : d 
fortnightly meetings.  As:«for as And The Band ‘Chui ahc was out of earshot, NATHAN ROAD 


nubjeet to a revision and unless After having had the apot|] wood Road, sections of The 
hy that time substantially more] washed and disinfected by the] Peak, and Tat Hang. 

money ie nubsertbed, they Wil] efouk-room attendant at the] PEE Bice ca ach 

hoveto he reduced or, in some] hotel, I procecded to get a taxl 


- ; e 
enses ended, leacting inevitably} ja Des Voeux Road. a P | 
to serent: diaappolntinent among As I watked eeross to the ersona 1a 


Pronecuting. S/I Bp 0 
Cameron, of the Kowloon Trafic 


say oat the UME ue (ene Can any one beac that! * Civil Service, and Mr. C.V.} small ehild were pene The The only direct evid h 

is required to make the Scheme Quite a number of Europeans] Ducuroic, a Belgian engineer, and] the pavement at the time. The} p60 could ec, the numbers attend. ect evidence she 

feomplete’y. saceesstal, Only | now travel in the Srd Clasa of | his wife.’ , enr atruck the-child and knocked Hs a swore atendlly. dwindling, and Dis od oO offered was that hor aunt told CHASE 

when all applications have been! the Ferries. Do beware, for oe) Oe her down, causing a contusion! j¢ Invited, suggestions from those jaye n tien keg an of the Fajgo- Tang Lan, 23, uncmployed, was 
a é doctor's fee 


received and the claims of the] yon are likely to get more than The following puasengers left/ on the ‘eft chest and a loug cul] oresent for arousing more Interest] 
applicants investigated wit it be? pitts blown down on you, as! by P.ALL, for Manila yesterday: —| under tho chin. 
possible to name ata appropriate) they invariably wo over to the Messrs, B.M, Brabant, FW. Chin,] ‘The defendant drove back to 


pentenced ie faut sponte are a 
, ly .30. abour. by Mr. Blair-Korr at Kow- 
Genter cinutioa. atid : other woman patient,| toon yesterday when he ploaded : 


‘in the activities of the Cluk, 
Afte® various suggestions, It 


figure but the Committee had} weather side. Lim On, Ma Chuy, S.F. Kuan,|the scene and offered the Indy| wag decided to leave these | for de a Cheung Yuk-lin, offered evidence} guilty. to snatching a gold ham 
hoped for oa much lirger “HE ELPLI PLESS VICTIM.” | AS. Lee, M.S. Crispulo, Y. Tong, | compensation if she did not re-| consideration by the new Com- ie. Hed a Ma Riches almost'on a paf with ‘Lam’s.| from Chon: Stu-mui. 
amount thitr Ghat which has al F, cleus Y. Tong, Y. Li, S. Lee,| port {o the Police. This the H She said she paid $3 to ‘the|, Inspector J, Orem, prosecuting, 


mittce comprising Fr. Sheridan, i, only to ‘find: her ex-G. IL 
refused, whereupon te-} Col, Eden, Mr. Jack-Braga, Mr. tae Neal wider another: gi 


‘Doctor.’ At first she said she} stated that complainant was walky 


rendy heen subserihbed, Jt must FALSE E PRETENCES iH. Kan, A. Lee, Yu Chal, Hing lndy 


be remembered that assistance ‘Jee, Hun Chun, Yet Lui, Leon| cused re-ontered his car and! MLA. Barnett, Mrs, Sando, Prof, | paid for & special ticket but later) (nz alone Nathan Rond at about . 
under the Scheme Is being given CHARGE Cheung, Yee Kow, Yam Yul, Tam] drove off at a high speed. Shel Ma Kium -and = Mesits. ’ Chan Burcnis deaction baer changed that to having made ete yon ea man dete 
without distinction to pebsons nas | Hang, Kong Who, Woo ‘Chee, htald her daughter to ‘yet the] Kwan-po, K.W. Lo, C.H, Cheng | “sha wag paroled to Miss An- the payment because ‘ she’ was snatched the chain. off her reck. 
of every class or nationality. Lee Sui Yee, 20, widow, was | Leong ci, Wong Hol, Lee Eng,| number, of the car. aiid S/T] and Ho Ngai-ling. ‘ale: Clo Wathon,-of the Intor- very pleased with the treatment Hearing erles of “snatching”, PG’ 

Ht is on'y when one considers | Hischarged by Mr, FP. X. d’'Almada) Vu Hoi, Liong Sam, Lut Eng,] Cameron, and the: girl gave it hational Institute, pending given.to her daughter. She also; A. Romero, attached to the Emer- |“: 
the nature of the ‘apptications | Mt Central yenteniles xhol satis Chong Hue, Lai Foo, Mrs. Chow] to-the ‘Traffic Office later as! _— Conyreasional reconsideration | "2 that she had to wait a few" gency Unit, ‘chased accused and | 
that Gne besins to realize how nae Saetaise ratangee wInin | Luat and Mr. Coo Sud, 2296, . in Janaary of bills -bffered .on| ™UMUtes before she could see the’ arrented him in Shantung Street, 
wient is the need of those whose vee da iebal Ne Mr, Ed. A. Harra and Mr. V.|- Inquirles showed this to be ore. Jap. her ‘beh! by. Representative 


4 allege Pu 
husbands have given everything! cheng: teal by, Dod Fong Eu aia ise by a BL. incorrect but defendant was 
for our cuise, In some ‘cases | §85 from Li So pretending that | QURMNG yesterday an rs. finally traced, 
persons, though not members of rhe was in a position to obtain Rendell for Honolulu. ° On ‘Tuesday night, continucd 


¥ \ eon Franck ‘Havenner ond. Senator 
Wa shigs ‘| Sheridah Downey of California 


i i to -permit: her. to remain. per. 
uny Allied organisation, did) nreferentin) trentment at the} Mr A.B, Hughes and Mr. EH. si] Cameron, he went to de- at 
their best to render aasistance Urban Council, Danks arrived , by PAL. from] fopdant’a house and, as. Wan “Phe second ‘group of exe Me crutéd Neto ole aie 


to their friends in the intern.| She was further alleged to have | Mania yesterday. - 
ment camps by sending parceta! Cbtuined $64 from Tam Suen 


or messages, Discovery by the a ee circtimstuncos, 


4 4 was not in, left instructions with! Jopanese warships drawn by the 
the ervent to tell him to call] United Kingdom ‘will “pass 
in the ‘morning at 9 a.m. through Hong Kong en route for 


ago only to discover that Harry 
Leroy ; Donaldson, whom. she 
met. in Shanghai, was already 


Taneengera fur Mong Koni who embarks 
1. Beythia and are due to arrive un 


hearing evidenee, the 


ra pH EU ay ai Prag In} Magistrate-held” that defendant ‘Alderman, Bree 2 - Second Incident — + eae within: the mext-duy or | married; In thé six months shé| ~~~ a “Lenses - “aclentinentiy miide; specially ‘formulated to 
Cie is mw one re a had no case to answer ond dis-| p, Hoard, W.T. Bus At 8B p.m. went on pro- rhe halgt. 68 the following has been held ehe has. recelved absorb infra-red rays. . 
alightoat yee i os fae ne} charged her, Bonnett, Mra, MAF. Nigam secuting officer, he received a hi 4 ee , Sacal 2 | more thon 60 offers of marriage ee : 
siully. danerta: dete’ anlage oe : Motes Pe eee piamtte | Mis OM.) telephone report of a trafic. ac- Maki. completed’ shortly. betoro| fd an offor-of a, $350 2 month w Smartly designed frames to give you unobstructed, ee 
foimitlon about ‘thelr ‘ileal ten Gane “ueeninees ice ae ra A. loner Madur’ on, ne in, Oa nose ane in the cud ofcche ‘Wer ond jnounting Apts: ae Ea she woud. accept vision and: perfect comfort, ' te hee 
Col, Bury, A, , | Wwhich car oC! own a c Intter.-Associate C88, ‘ : 
we eee ee kept from | Quittry Buy Market has been nL, Cheater Mee 1D, fema'e pedestrian. On arrival,; three ave ie. ae ey ee t 0 ah Purchase Your Sun Glasses sou 
the“ Proce the trntment| Wil be realeted tp prewar | ieee nyse kes Hi aang nce fet, tHe st atoger” Yuka, comple ae 
Y  treatme El be re-ailotted re-war | 9 . * “yo 
meted out to the victims . of | lessees if claimed eit ait before TREE tupned Meee eked in 1921; (he escort veasel Kanawe, en < 
» Japanese tyranny are by now] August 14, 1947, + we OWA. Fairbatn, Misa MW " asimih, out and drove off again’ pt completed tree droit bone bares 0. eo 
. : Mra, DN. Geltithe, Mra. OLA, Hawkins, roan 
a eee a peeroe Hamilton, Mr, and Meee high, speed. Aceused mado td inch guns,. and four smaller | 


a i attempt.to take the woman, who 
re eat tek EE aM! #™ | ag" auiterinie froma brulged 
_ Da des Ma BJs temln, | A forshout sly x hospital. i 
r ‘ — " vin, Mrs, anes, Mra. J. Jaaper, Mra. ake iy r, Bir, err 
YES, AND NATURE ae “Kei Miss DE. Keates, Mrs: } whether he had anything to aay 


TOOK YEARS To? Mra re. cow Ming, Fy mitigation, defendant said 


vessels. which were, known in the Se eee eee : 
Japanuse Navy as Sea Defence ' Applicants for admissfon: to 67, Giicedy. Road 


Vessels, | ie Norinco baagae qt ‘ For: Pioféssic ion al Eye Service 
.!The ships are cecorted by the ng College, are. notifie at 
Noval auxiliary. Hayazaki in| the Entranéo Examination will 


“which the steaming crews will bo| be ‘held ‘at. the-College-on 18th, 


Tel. 23508; | 


Mir, FL. Large, Mrs. ¥.M. Lunning, 


“NATURE TOOK - 


MM. " 4.3.8, MeNanara, Mr, and | lucky not to being: charged with 
WHISKY.” ‘ Nicholl, Mr, 1.00. { 8 more serious offence. ¢ as. he 


IJ, OND D f 
Paul, Mis, 3M.OC." Pelee Ma. se pee | Would ‘have been had the accl- 


Miu Ma Li Lang, Hf, Leaver, Mas 34 | that, he did. not, know the Traf- 10th, 20th; 21st August; com- fous Tie = Sanh thee aatite ade hin coy 
YEARS TO PRODUCE PRODUCE i nll i clea ing oa Mrvand/ fle Regulations. sitar Bure ie aepae ae meneing : at'9 a.m, ‘daily.’ . vada a eae AY z Behe Mui a 
sioctosh ; RE Tae yeceans Mee ML. Metansan, | After commenting that defen: : | There: will be 60 vacancies on FINEST WORK: SPEEDY § d ] ' 

THAT coat” "BLACK & WHITE “Mr. Jy Minty, ar. and Mrs, | dant could consider. himse'f the Vernacular sides, and 26,on).-0 j eene : : 


Mi ‘Ma ite oe ae eth side. Btudents so. , : 
entering on the nglish’ side} - . aed 5 : 
seme hg) Money Mart |iigcme Git) mo 
Mr, MQ. FP , ven more. serious), the a standard compara to Matri- 5 Fog ah : 
Potts, MD, Pte aaa fies big magistrate imposed a fine of | - Gold : opened : at: $ at tac! seu! tation. P # Bid aad! se 8 
DE* Rimmer, Mrs. HP, Riley, Mew $25 on each of the ‘two counta| yesterday. and: after a temporary; Tuition {8: free; ‘arid gible we . DEVELOPING - - 
HL. fd Mee PD lroferring to “L” plates, tha! drop to $319.26, pag to. ntl encé: allowaneé is’ pald." : 
LA amin Ma,| Maximum of $260 ° on: gach, ord remained . at . Aguyp un ‘The daté ‘of ‘returning ‘com- 
LV. Saunders, Mrs, eur! failure. tc. report an. accident, | the market..clo tet, anit at bieted, “application forms: which 
‘Thompson, A.D, Toouoot, L. ‘Todé, Wore | $100, for beltig:. unaccompanied |, Pisstres: were quiet, ope ng: aro’ obtainable: from: tha: Prin 


Chue-ruan, Mra, WP. Wille, Mrs. OAL | by a, licensed driver, and $400 Woo at $1115 a} oat, Northcote Trafning Co!-| 
IWR. Young, Mra. LEL Your, Mean | Or dangerous drivi oe Chineso National ge, Bonham — Koad, +Hong 


Mea ee eahatte cites Bike Murtay Paso futures. rose frum 11.2, to 11315 ong, is;now oxtended to Satur- 


cents for CN$L,000, day, Me ik 9, . 
stationary ‘ ‘at 13,2, centes 5°. 
US: dollars. wore unchgniea it 
$4.05... Sterling. was’ firmer at 
1 $13.16, Australian paunds were}: 
2.53. ‘ 


neound guilty, y Mr. Wx. 
ane coe aterdny.of |. 


ral cre) es “alan 


a SUPPLIES: . 


ae Ra UBIO 4 


negro ‘mali in hers; 
and’ given a’: 


pet as 
babertlveiaiy 


_ Robbery - 


“Lords Decitlé 


¢ 


~ LONDON, JULY 29. 

THE MARQUESS OF SALIS. 
BURY, LEADER OF TIE CON. 
SERVATIVE OPPOSITION IN 
THE HOUSE OF LORDS, AN. 
NOUNCED TODAY THAT HIS 
PARTY, WITH A MAJORITY IN 
THE UPPER HOUSE, DID NOT 
.INTEND TO INSIST ON THE 
AMENDMENTS TO THE GOV- 
ERNMENT’S TRANSPORT NA- 
TIONALISATION BILL, WHICH 
“WERE LAST WEEK REJECTED 
BY THE HOUSE OF COMMONS. 

He omade it plain, however, 
that the Opposition would pyt 
forward modified smendmenta to 
nome of the clauses ino an effort 
tu reaeh on canpromlse on somes 
hot the features of the bi which 
they particularly rejected, 

He declared that the netion of 
the Howe of Commons In reject. 
jng the amendments, which al. 
fected the power of the Minister 
and the extent. of State contyol 

Hover the nation's Inland commun. 
tations, owas aknost a “Single 
Chamber Goyernment Ina veiled 
fort.” Keuter,’ 


New Soviet 
‘Non-Frat 
Decision 


Berlin, July 29. 

Reliable sources reported: tos 
day that the Soviet High Com- 
mand has ordered Its civillan 
personnel and dependents — ln 
oovupled) Germany to segregale 
themselves from the German 
population and move into new 

t compounds reserved for Soviet 
personnel, 

No nuthoritotive explanation 
for the order wan avidlable, hut 
rome observers helleved it 
followed — Col-Gen Kurasov's 
‘order warning against pitlalls 
of frater#isxation with Germans 
and exposure to temptations of 
cbourgeois murals. 

The Amertedu-ficensed news- 
paper, ‘Tagessplegel, reported 
German civillany were evacuat 
ing dozens of buildings in Ber- 
lin's Soviet seetor ta muke way 
for new compounds where Soviet 
chilians wil be concentrated, 

Meantime private sources suid 
16,000 fresh Russian troops had 
arrived Jin eastern Germany to 
relieve veteran Soviet oceupa- 
tion detichments.—United Preys, 


~Democratié 


League And 
Wedeinéyér 


Nanking, duly 30. | R 


Four leading members of the! 
Democratic League, which. was: 
recently, accused by the govern-! 
ment of being the “Communist; 


_ tall,” conferred with Lt, Gen. 


a Xangtze-—United Press, 


, Albert Wedemeyer - yeaterday: 
"and toll him thot the United; 
States shou'd withhold all aldi 
to China until pence fs firmly: 
establahed, 

Gen, Wedemeyer queationed 
them on the reasons for the 
failure. of agreements reached 
, during the Marshall mediation 
© period and regarding the war 
‘aliuation chances of both sides, 

Leaders of the League sald 
that if American oid was given 
before peace, it wou'd go into 
“the civil war. 

Gen. Wedemeyer relaxed his 
husy schedule this evening by 
bouting with frienda on. the 


CIGS. REGRETS 
_-' The CIGS will not now be 
; visiting Hong Kong, -This-“in- 
” formation has -been received by 


‘the GOC.with no special message 


trom the C.1.GS,..to’ His, « Excel-, 


Jency’ Tho, Governor; . expressing 
hia regret at having to cancel a 
visit’: which He hod been looking 
forward ‘to with such. pleasure. 


With Violence Case 


Accused 


Victor John Brown 
mitted for.trial b 


Sgr aE ‘CHINA “MAIL, AHUISDAY; wEY" a1, 1947, 


: ., COMMANDO SENT FOR] TRIAL 


hing 


la Court 


On Stretcher 


25, 45 Commando, was_com-: 
Y Mr. ‘W. H. Latimer at Kow- 


loon yesterday ‘on a charge of robbery with 
violence on a pathway off Austin Road, near 
Gun Club Hill ‘Barracks, on May 22 when 
Leung Kimi-sHeung ‘was robbed of a watch, a - 
‘fountain pen, a pencil, and $63 in in cash, A 


His’ co-defendant, James An- 
drew Miller, 26, also. of 
Commando, was discharged on. 
the round = of Insufficient 
_vidence. ' 

"] have to warn you, how- 
ever,” «old Mr., Latimer, “that 
you are discharged and not Be- 
guitted and that you cannot 
plead, in’ cone further evidence 
could be produced, that you 
have been acquitted on the 
charge." 

Brown, who appearesl in 
Court on a. stretcher, was al- 
loged by DSI 1M. Forrest to 
have been one ef tivo meu why 
followed = Loung Ly vn Auatin 
Rond nt, about 46 p.m. on 
May 22, and, to ila robbed and 
assau'ted him, 

Coat Over. Head 

Leung was set upon by two 
Murepeans in white. open-aeck 
shirts and dark blue trousers an 
he was on his way back ‘to the 
Barracks, One man threw a 
éont over his head, robbed him 
of the articles mentioned, and 
threw him to the ground, 

When he heard one of them 
aay, “Get away quickly,” Leung 
got up and saw both men run- 
ning down the patch towards 
Austin Road. He chnsed them 
but lost sight of them in Nathan 
Road, He returned to the Bar- 
racks where he made a yeport, 
nnd, Jater In the,, evening, re- 
ported to the Police, 

DSI W.G. Morrison 
the sceno of the robbery and 
found shins of ao, strugute, He 
a‘so, found a handkerchief and 
‘some personal papers, suid DSL 
Forrest, 

Coneussed 

Leung was sont to Kowloon 
Hospital suffering from — con- 
cusalon and was detained for 
two days. He, furnished a des- 
eription of the two men which 
tallied? with a deseription sup. 
plied ‘by the Military Authorl- 
tics of (wo absentecs, 

He passed on. the description 
suppiied by Leung to the Mili- 
tary Authorities on May 24 and 
Brown and Miller were detain- 
ed. On May 26, an Identification 
parade wos held at . Whitfield 
Barracks when, it was alleged, | 
Brown was identified: by Leung. 

Dr. Au Wal-man,. who 
examined Leung on May 22, 
koid he found bruises over the 
right eye, the forehead and be- 


went to 


-Phind-theJeft-ear-There-wes-wag-|— 


hacmatomr of the scalp 
the left occipital region, 
witness, 


over 
said 


e wo os 
ritons Too 
‘efey tars 
tilitarian 
London, July 29. 
\-The Swiss ore umbarrassed by 
British tourists svho spend the 
greater: port of their £75 foreign 
exchangs allowance .in Swiss 
shops, pnd talks started at the 
Tronaury here today to find means 
of curbing this trend, — . 
« Britain hos an understanding 
with Switzerland thot British 
tourists will be allowed to spend 
ebout £4,600,000 - in Switzerland 
this year. 

British tourlets, howaver, ‘who 
axe undor sovere rationing reatric- 
tions at-hoine, find that the most 

ttractive Wate in Switserland: is 

vided by. tar well-atocke 
and. many of them apend 
clr allotment in two or three 
days.and go .home happy. ~ 
onsequently, the shops are 
denuded-of stocks and the hotels 
ang restaurants are not getting 
their expected share of the tour- 
2 monoy-—Router.. 


| ‘CHOLERA RA MENACE 
«Plea 


Rullty.to a breach of 
tho Ghee ‘Remutntions, Yuen 
Foon and Chan Hang were ench 
fined $100 or eee months’ hard 
fnbour ‘by ‘Mr. in at Central 
Peony. 
th 6.8 
ocrated water: with orange | ee 
and sliced orange, eae with 
raw. jee... : 


Togliatti 
Toes theéLine 


Rome, July 29. 

. The-Communigt leader, Pal- 
miro Toxliatt!, denounced. Ita- 
lian foncign poticy aa _anti-So- 
viet tonight dnd said that 
Italy's cooperation with the 
Western powers was a-"“had 
mistake because a decided break 
between the East and the Weat 
in elenrly outlined.” 

Jn a two-hour oration. the 
header of 2,200,000 Commuiints 
warned the government “to 
choose # nosy road before the 
fracture occurs,” 

Speaking against ratification 
of the peace treaty in the Na- 
tlona) Assemb'y, = Togilutti 
termed Italy's particlpation In 
the Marshall plain conference, as 
an error and demanded — that 
Italy remain free of either bloc 
and “oppose with a'l qur force 
any policy which aims at the 
fsolation of the Soviet. Union.” 
United Press, 


DECORATIONS | 
A Ladies .-nid Gentlemen 
restdent in Hong Kong (except 
servings Members of His Ma. 
jJexty’s Forces) who have’ had 
tny decoration conferred on 
them are asked to notify. the 
Chief Clerk, Colonial * Secre- 
tarint, Lower Albert Road, not 
later than’ Tuesday, August 12, 
1947, stating the year in which 

the decoration was conferred. 


G.M.H, ARREST 


Found inside the compound of 
the Military Hospital, and. to by 
in breach of a deportation ordér, 
Yu Shag, alins Wong Sing, was 
xentenved to six. months’ hard 
Inbour and ordered to be - roe 
cxpelled by Mr. F. X. d’Almada at 
Central yesterday, 

Inspector Brownrigiz, uaid dee 
fondant, with another man not in 
custody. was found inafde 
compound of the Military Haspt. 
tal, whore there had been a num- 

r of turcenies lately, 


the | W. 


1 One Freed 


Biitish 
iProtest 
To Soviet 


-LONDON, JULY ‘op. 

- BRITAIN HAS MADE REPRE. 
SENTATIONS TO THE SOVIET 
GOVERNMENT AGAINST THE 
ALLEGED PREMATURE COL. 
LECTION OF GERMAN ASSETS 
FROM HUNGARY AS A FORM 
OF - REPARATION PAYMENT, 
THE FOREIGN OFFICE SPOKES. 
MAN SAID TODAY, 

The British view was outlined 
in a note presented. to the Soviet 
Government by the British Am- 
bassador, Slr Maurice Peterson. 

Though the arrangement con. 
cluded between the Big - Three 
powers in the 1046 Potsdam Con. 
ference, by which the Soviet 
Union wns to get as reparations 
all Germon aosscts in Hungary, 
was confirmed In the Hungarian 
pence treaty, the British.Govern. 
ment considered that-these assets 
should not be collected before the 
Hungarlan treaty) came Into 
force, 

The United Stotes authorities 
were understood to be muking a 
similar move in Moscow.— Reuter. 


An Ktalian 
Apologia 
To Russia - 


Rone, July 29. 

A Foreign Qifice spokesman 
suld today... that the Italian 
Forelyn Minigter,- Count Carlo 
Sforan, informed - the Soviet 
Ambassador, Mihall KoatiJev,. in 
Sunday's. conference that the 
government's desire to ratify 
the, peace treaty and Its parti. 
clpation jn the Marshall Plan 
conference “had no anti-Soviet 
significance’: 

Refuting Italian press com- 
ments that Mr. Koatiley had ex- 
prassed’ Russia’s disapproval of 
Italy's actlon, the spokesman 
said that no such questlon arose, 

Mr. Kostllev visited’ Count 
Sforza on the Forelgn Minister's 
invitation, the spokesman guald, 
“beenuse the Minister had not 
seen the Ambassador since his 
return from Paris’.— United 
Pregs, 


For keeping an opium divan at 
No. 13 Main Street, tat floor, 

ong. Sze, 40, widow, when 
da arc eee Mr. FB. X. d'Alma- 

ot Central yesterday wa refined 
$760.or two months. . 


eto Kills. 


— Plan 


Russia falda il 
breposal to f 
M. rece: ion re the Bal 


feat the reso! 


ake Success, July 30. 


LL: is 
killed with ‘her. veto an American 


a,11-nation border watch 
ans, .- : 


drei be hed calmly raised his hand to de- 
ution after. abstaining ‘through- 


out 10 preliminary paragraph by paragraph 


ballots, 

It was the 11th thne in United 
Natlona history that Russia hos 
Invcked the big power veto. Pho 
final vote was 9 to 2 with Poland 
Joining Russin in oppoattlon, .. 

Hersche}. V.. Johnson, deputy 
American — dolegatc, said ths 
Soviet veto created o. 
situation,” and enlied for : 
mediate adjournment. of the 
Council to allow delegates. to con- 
sult thelr: . home govornments. 
Later, Johnson told - newsmen 
that.,his. government, “dors: not 
intend .to let’ ft zo by dofault.”.. 
be Me..added: “The action Russia 
as’ taken iy simple nbyso . of 
powers a simple abuso of tho. vate. 

this cuse St is contrary to the 
understanding among-. the. Bir 
Five on tho use of tho veto. a 
timo ‘the United: Nations, st the 
was framed in San Franetsco.’ 
i “Tho Baker ‘altuation' has mt 
boen wiped: ouf by the vata,” 
sear ya” From . 

_ US. - Huddle - 
Noshington, July ‘20,., 

State’ Department: officiais .went 
Vinto gonferencp immediately after 
- {fenrning pf Grom 's veto action, 
They presumably: : Aiscussed: the 
situation with’ an ey, 
commendatlons which . would’,be 


toward re. | ;th6 


submitted to General Marshall, 
probably tomorrow, on the Unit. 
ed States’ next steps regarding 
the Balkans.—United Press, 


United Action ° 


Lake Success, July 30. 
Great Britain and the United 


:'| States were expected to reply in 


strong terms at tonight's mect- 
ing of the United Nations 
Security Council to Russia’s 
veto. yesterday on ‘the proposed, 
permanent Balkan border patrol; 

The veto was regarded here 
as killing. all hope of bringing 
immediate peace to the troubled 
Balkans, and today’s New York 
Times, in an editorial, said it 
prevented the United Nations 
from carrying out. the task for 
which {it .was . created—safe- 
guarding .of interna fonek peace 
and security. 

“Not: only ‘has, Ru _ opened 
‘the way, for:further © frontior 
pr Hlana,» but. pe hee fay Mote 
ngtica on wor at if, they 
d i 0! It. wif]. bo: with. her 

ox, her, protec- 
paper added. 


‘DETECTIVE’S “TRIAL: 


Acquitted On All 


‘Thiee 


‘|The accused | is: 
‘declared Mr. 


Charges | 


hah ell on “all rg chatwes” 


iiner at the conclusion 


‘of his judgment, delivered: at. Kowloon yester- 


day. in the case in wi 
“lam was. charged wit 


aces, ori March 14, the sum of $ 


ich Detective Chan Fu- 
demandin, ng with men- 
from Tsoi 


Lau, attempting, to obtain a wie of $150 from- 
the same "Bribes of 85 on the same day, -and. 


obtaining a bri 
Tung on March 

The Court was agoin Hy 
with defendant's colleygues and 
friends who flocked around him 
aftcy. the Court interpreter had 
Interpreted. tho. verdict. - 

Mr. G.g. Hugh-Jones can 
ducted the cage for the defence, 
while fdr, Marcua da Silva (as- 
sixted by Det-Inspector WN. 
Darkin): prosecuted .- o 

Mr. Latimer .agid: “Hofore 
preceeding ‘to judgment 1 wish 
to compliment, counse] ‘in the 
manser in which this cage has 
been conducted. The prosecu- 
don, though firm, was very fair- 
ly presented and.the, defence 
did not seek to cloud the. fasue, 
us migth well -haye been done, 
by the introduction of evidence 
other than on those mistters 
which were _ necessary. to deal 
with the points at indue." 

In hia review of the care, His’ 
Worship atated that. “the 
evidence given by both aides re- 
garding the mecting on the 
evening of March 14 must he 
viewed with considerable  sua- 
picion in view of the: lapse of 
time before any’ complaint was ; 
made.” 


‘ Dereliction OF Diity 


Regarding Chan's failure to 
report the alleged offer .of a 
bribe to him by Tsoi ,at tho 
Brothers’ Cafe and the later. ar- 
rest of Tsoi as a suspected re- 
turned banishee, His Worship 
anid that he considered, “the 
first failure was a grave derelic- 
tion of duty for a detective 
and, while 1 can find no rule 
that the second’ failure to re- 
port ts regarded as a depart- 
mental offence, {t-is in my 
opinion again a matter which 
should have been reported in 
the usual way to. his superior 
officers in order that the Po‘ice 
force be kept advised of what. is 
happening generally. These two 
facta throw. doubt ..on the. ac- 
cused’s actions, but not sufficient 


proof that thia arrest was mali-. 


cious or simply. : -because tha 
$500 was not handed over,” 
Continuing, His Worship de- 
clared, “In thls I feel the pro- 
secution fs making. o case. of 
aposthoe ergo propter ad with." 
out suffitient nexus and I can. 
not accept ‘that, [t might just as 
well as argued, and in fact with 
eyual force, thut the, arrest.of 
the aceused and the laying of, o 
{rap (from which he escaped) 
was the result of his arteat of 


@: OF $150 from Tsot Lau and 


that there waa never a gub- 
stitutlay of three inferlor pipes 
for three good opium pipes on 
the morning of March'15, nnd, 
spores, that the $150 for 
-thl. Heged .. transaction was 
noyer paid. 

“The aecused 6 aequitted on 
all three charges.” . 


Guerille 
uerilas 
Outwit 
Greek Army 
Yarinina, July 29, 

Military observers to- 
day credited the guerilla 
forces with outwitting 
the Greek. Army and 
nullifying _ the  five- 
month campaign to trap 
them. . 


The reinforced Greck Army 
; began to roll the bandits back 


{ast month with a wide-fronted; 


push through Central | Greece. 
The rebels were forced back to 
tho Kastorla-Florinn area with 
the border. ‘at, thelr. backs. 

The rebels however arranged 
to crosg into Yugoslavia, secure 
new arma and: equipment and 
head‘ toward the west coast, 
They moved along the Yugoslav. 
Albanian border until they came 
to the weakest section of the 
Greek-Albantan frontier, in the 
vicinity of. Yannina, 


The rebels than atruck across 


the * border, outflanking — the 
Greeks, and headed south, They 
aunt yee first skirmish near 
a, by. pass 4 ni 

wheeled tnfand oileg tor 
thelr original eeeinls in 
Kozani leaving the army between 
them’.and the ‘border, 

The army was now forced to 
reverse itself 
a begin the 


Tsoi Lau: 

“{ must direct myself,” said 
His Worship, In the words used 
by Viscount Sankpy ,in..Wool- 
mington ys, The Director. of 
Public Prosecution: “Throughout 
the web of the English Criminal} 
Law ono golden thread is always 
to be seen, and that is that it ta 
the duty of the prosecution’ to 
prove the prisoner’sa guilt. If 
at tho end of, and on the whole 
of, the case there ia a reasonable 
doubt .created by the evidence 
given by- either the prosecution 
or the prisoners, the pros¢cu- 
tion has not minade out the.case 
and the prisoner ig entitled to 
an acquittal.’ 


No Proof . “ 
“There, is no proof of. any 
menace, The only time: there 
was any suggestion of force 
was at the thme of the arresl. 
for, suspected banishment, and 
there ia no suggestion that any 
monoy ‘was mentioned ‘at: that 
time. What would hive, been a! 
more. propitious accaiaign? i 

“Dealing. withthe — third 
charge, that. of. substitutl f 
the oplum pipes, I’ feel that it 
I.do not. accept.the word of 
threa policemen, thi 
wero not: ‘remove om 
strong-room andes, Inepector. 
“MachMahon's. i" and taken 
to the ‘Maigatray at . about 
9:80 Aym.. . ‘arch © 46,' it 
would: have. the. effect of throw- 
ing the: entire: Police force into 


Li Yat-ching, 82, was fined 3 
by. Mr... Blalr-Kerr’ at Kowteen 
eaterday for spitting on . tho 
rst-claas deck of tha “Northern 
Star” at 7.20 a.m. yostorday, 


heading for: 


sbirrine —|I 


When ‘you want to hacia = 


~NEW ANTIMALARIAL REMEDY | 


‘M3 to a totally. new. anil actentifically, prepared com- | 


pound of mercury, ‘manganese and: extract of spleen, ' 
fullowing exhauative investigations for Jmalaytal , contro] 
at. the stutevontrolled Italian” Biochemical. Inatitute - 
under the direction of Prof, G, Lorengint of the Royal 


University of Milan. thie ‘ 
: M3 In not a substitute ‘for , quinine or, its aynthatic 


dorlvatives | atabrin and plaamoqulne, it is rathor a now 
complement of these . accepted’ . medications and 
specifically attucké the, hitherto, unfffected sexuul cycle 
of the malprial Pparnlle’s Ife to prevent relapsca and 
recurrency. 


M3 is recommended for all forms of malaria, acuto _ 


and chronic, relapses and recurrency, for homoglo- 
binurle fever and for prolonged prophylaxis, , Litera- 
ture and completé instructlons with: each bottle, 


AVAILABLE AT 
ALL LEADING . DISPENSARIES - 
_ __Sole . Distributors in, China: nt 
_E. OTTS © 20. LTD. 


- French Bank, Building, ' . ot Tel. 84107. / 


OR REASSE 
SHAVE JUST WASH A: 
WATER, HARE: ge ORY’. 


E VERNHARP 


Schick Injector 


, Sate pera . 2 : 
HANG ‘TAI & FUNGS. co. 


KAYAMALLY BUILDING 


am. 


® The ee name and address ft a Company er 


e The correct name and address of: ie Hong Kong 
: agent for any Product wee, 4 


@ The. correct. name of the. stoft 0 ot a Hoi Kong : 
Company ' eee! we 


@ The. correct. fainie ‘ana. adare 
_ment Department ew 


"ary mG 


grave discredit, And ols I do 


not: propose todo... 
‘passing, that for a Police o 


.| to endeavane fo ehenae thre 


morhing ‘i whayt 


i yea are. ee 


Ol 


See 


TRI 


ey sd 


*T'- THE, CHINA MAIL, THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1047," 


| Occupat 


Pago 4 


CLASSIFIED 


THE HONGKONG & |THE HONGKONG AND| ‘HONG KONG 


Replies are owalting at our 

offices for Box Nas: 210, 265, 266, 

! 273, 274, 278, 283, 203, 296, 
209, 308, 309, 310, 312. 


TO LET 


FULLY FURNISHED | sultes, 
double or single rooms in Homan- 
tin Hil) Read, Kowloon; ideal. for 
Europeans; Transport and board 
avaiioble, if desired: To avoid 


Road, C,, or phine 28904 for full 
particulars: Moderate Terms, 


WANTED TO BUY 


WANTED: — Crystal Chandeliers 


und Crystal Candelabra, Apply 
Box 314, “Chinn Mall.” 

WANTED §. 
SMALL DANCE BAND (Trip- 
Quartette) one or two evenings 
weekly: Semi-permanent engage - 
ment, Detalls to Box 319, “Ching 
Mall." 

FOR SALE 
KIGHTEEN FOOT Sailboat, 


Centrebonrd Drop Keel, Marconi 
Rigged, Perfect condition, » Now 
lying off Middle Island, Peep 
Woter Bay. For further particu. 
Inrs contact Medley. Tel, 27775. 


Beten’s Beauty Salons 


You can trust your personn) 
Beauty Problems -- your Per- 
manent Waves, Shampoo, Scts. 


: Tinting,  Fnelole, ‘Manicure, 
Pedicure to Beten’s expert 
aperatorn (Ist floor) abpve 


Lane Crawford's. Tel. 83161. 


Service Auction ; Rooms’. 


eee 


. Auctioneers, Surveyors, ete. 
» Basement, French Bank Bldx., 


A.E.B,_de Sousa, Auctioneer , 
Telephon 31807, 


“LAMMERT BROS 


Auctioncers, Surveyors 
and Appraisers, 


Pedder Building. 
Telephone No. 20224, 


PUBLIC AUCTION 


The Undersigned have received 
instructiona to gel) by Public 
Atctioh on: 


Friday, the ist August 1947 
commencing at 2.30 P.M. 


at thelr Sales Rooms No, 36 
Hankow Rend Kowloon. 


A FINE COLLECTION OF 
VALUABLE HOUSEHOLD 
FURNITURE 


comprising: — 


Tenkwood Wardrobes, Chest 
of Drawers, Low Boys, Dressing 
. Tables with Stools,. Divans, 
Bedstends, Bedside Cabinets, 
Drawing Room Sultes, ‘Dining 
Tables, Sideboards, - : Glass 
Cabinets, Reveralhle Seat Chairs, 
Oscillating -Pable :Fans,- Carved 
Camphorwocd'. Chests, ~ Cabln 
Trunk, Kitchen Tables,~Cutlery, 
Glass Ware, ‘Crockery, Writing 
Tables, Typist © Tables, and 
Blackwood Hall Armchairs Etc., 


rush call at Room 10%, 33, Queen's Aug 


1d fhink - fit, 


Company, will beheld at the 
Office ‘of Messrs. Jardine, 
Matheson & Co,, Ltd., on Thurs- 
day the 7th August, 1947, at 
Noon, to receive the Report of 
the Bonrd of Directors and 
Statement of Accounts for the 
year ended 8ist December, 
1946, to elect Directors and to 
appoint Auditors, 


NOTICE Js also given that 
the Transfer, Books of the Com- 
piny will be closed from . the 
24th | July, 1947, to the th 

ust, 1947, both days inclu- 
slye, et 


By order of the Board of 
Directors, 


CHAS. E. TERRY, 
Manager and Secretary. 


Hong Kong, 10th July, 1947. © 
N : = 


THE HONGKONG & 
KOWLOON WHARF & 
GODOWN CO., ‘LTD. : 


NOTICE TO 
SHAREHOLDERS, 


NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN 
that an Extraordinary General 
Meeting of the Company will be 
held at the Office of Messrs. 
Jardinc, Matheson & Co. Ltd, 
on Thursday, 7th August, 1947, 
at 12.30 p.m., or at such time as 
the Ordinary General Meeting 
to be held at the same place at 
Noon shall terminate, for the 
purpose of considering and if 
thought fit passing the follow- 
ing as Special Resoluttons, 
| vigs— 


“(L) That the Authorised 
Capltal of the Company (which 
js now $8,000,000.00 consisting 
of 160,000 sharea of . the 
nominal value of $50.00 each, of 
which 90,000 shares have been 
issued), be Increased to $60,- 
000,000.00 by the creation of 
femina additional shares of the 


nominal value of $50.00 vach, 
nd that’such shares’ be issued 
at such ‘a-time® or times’ and 
pon euch terms as -the.Com. 
any's Board of Directors in 
elr ‘absolute ‘discretion, shall’ 


-“(2) That Artlele 19 of the 
Company's Articles of Assocta- 
tion be caricelled, and the follow- 
Ing substituted therefor:— 


‘19. 


Notwithstanding any of the 
provistons these Articles of 
Asaoctation no Shareholder shall 
without the danctlon of the 
Directors be entitled at any tme 
to be registered as the holder of 
more than one-tenth of the 
Capital of the Company Issued 
for the time’ being. = Provided 
nevertheless that the -registra. 
‘tion of a transfer of shares 
whereby the holding -of any 
Sharcholder Ig increased beyond 
the sald amount shall be con- 
clusive evidence that the, sanc- 
tlon of the Directors to such in- 
creased holding has been given 
but shall not be evidence that 
‘the Directors have ‘ sanctloned 
any further increase by such 
Shareholder in his holding!” 


NOTICE IS AL GIVEN 
that {if the above resolu No. 
(1)' is duly: passed as a 8: 
Resolution, it is the Intention, of 
the Board of Dirdctors In accor. 
dance with’ ‘the terms of ‘the 
Speclat Resolutions passed: on 
the 7th doy of March, 1986, to 
offer as soon as possible Aftet 
the 7th day of. August, . 1947, 
70,000 new shares of tho nomin- 
al vajuc of $60.00: -ecach,--being, 
the present unissued Capital: of’ 
the Company,. togather. with. an 
additlonal:'20,000: now sharos ‘of 
tho néminal value of*350.00 each 
In accordance with the terms of 
the, abovo Resolution, making o 
total-of 90,000 now shares - of 
the nominal value. of $50.00 
euch, to the persons who.on the 
Wth day of August, 1947, ore 
registered . in the Company's 


-being made 


wank ‘for dividend . hnd in all 


per Dollar. : 


THIS DIVIDEND WILL BE 
PAYABLE on and after 
MONDAY 11th August at the 
offices of the Corporation, where 
Shareholders are requested to 
apply for Warrants. ‘ 


THE REGISTER - OF 
SHARES of the Corporation 
will be closed from ‘MONDAY 
28th July to SATURDAY. 9th 
August (both days {ncluaive) 
during which period no transfer 
of Shares can be registered. 


BY ORDER OF THE. 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS. 


"A, MORSE, 
Chief Manager 


BY ORDER OF THE 
- LIQUIDATOR 


Messrs Lammert Hrothers have 
‘received Instructions to sell. by 
. Public Auction 
In One Lot . 
The Va'uable Leasehold 
Property : 
situated at 
Repulse Bay in the Colony” of 
: }rongkong 
and being 


Rural Building Lot No. 
Together with the damage 
mensunge thereon known 43 
“Mirador” Repulse Bay, Hong 
Kong, 

on 
Thuraday 


the 7th day of Aupuat 19AT 
at, 3 o’c'ock p.m. 
at 


Pedder Building, Victoria, 


for further Particulars and 
Conditions of Sale 


Apply 


Mesers Deacons, 
1, Des Vocux Road, Ceutrat, 
Solfcitors for the Liquite- 
tors. : 


or to - 
Messrs. Lammert Brothers, 
‘Pedder Building, Hong- 
kong, Auctioneers. — . 


—the balance of $50.00 per 
share, being the ‘remaining hair 
of the nominal value plus, the 
remaining half of the premium. 


(c) Payment of the sum of 
$50.00 .per share on acceptance 
of the offer shall be deemed to 


and the balance of $60.00 per 
share ahall be deemed to be the 
balance . payable,...within _ the 
meaning of Articles 34 to 43 of 
the Company's Articlés of Asso- 
clation. 


(Ht) Subject to payments 
on the due dates, 
auch new shares shall rank ns 
partly, paid shares from Jat 
January, 1048, and as fully old 
shares from 1st Jul", 1948, 
participating in dividend for 
the period Ist January, 
1948, to 3Sist June 1948, 
to the'extent of one quarter, and 
for the perlod 1st July, 1948, to 
Slat December, 1948, to the ex- 
tent of one half the amount de- 
clared for existing shares in 
respect'of tho year 1948, 
thereafter ranking .for dividend 
and’ in all other respects pari 


passu with the existing shares 


of the Company. 


(ui) That where the ‘share. 
holder so desires, the full sum 
of $100.00 per share may be 
pald.up.on acceptance of the 
offer, and in. such event, any 
shares on which the full sum 
shill’ have been pald.up shall 


other -resptcts: part passu with 
the existing shares of the Com- 
pony os from Ist January, 
1048.” - 


~The offer will be made ., by 
Notieo pent. by’ post. to each 
shareholder, '- , specifying the}! 
number of shares: to’ which: the 


165 | 


Hongkong, ' 


+| to 


be the first call on such shares, |, 


and]: 


will be run at the above Mecting 


Applicants for mdmission to 
the above Teachers’ Training 
College, are hereby notified that 
the ENTRANCE EXAMINA- 
TION will be held at the College 
on 18th, 19th, 20th, 21st August, 
commencing at 9 a.m. daily. 


There will be 60 vacancies on 
the Vernacular side; and 25 on 
the English side. Students 
entering on the English alde will 
be required to have reached 
standard comparable to Matri- 
‘culation. 


Tuition is free, and a subsis- 


tence allowarce Is pald, 


\pleted ‘application forms, obtain- 
able from the undersigned, is 
now extended to Saturday, 9th 
August, 1947. ; 


W. J. DYER, 
Princtpal, 


‘Northcote Training College, 
Bonham Road, Hong Kony. 


Dnatod: 28th July, 1947. + 


URBAN COUNCIL 
NOTIFICATION 


QUARRY BAY 
MARKET 


It ia hereby notified that the 
Quarry Bay Market has been 
I yehabilltated and that the stalls 
will be re-allotted to preawar 
lessces if clalmed on or before 
Mth August, 1947, 


Pre-war lessees must appear 
fn person and produce all pre- 
vious documents in connectlon 
with the lease of their stalls 
the URBAN COUNCIL 
.OFFICE, Post Office Building, 
Top Floor, Hong Kony, not Jater 
than 14th August, 1947, other. 
wise the unclaimed stalls will be 
Iet to new tenderers. 


R. W. dhe MAYNARD, 
Secretary, Urban Council. 


Dated: 30th July, 1947. 


rrr 


GOVERNMENT 
NOTICE. 


Will all Ladies and Gentle. 
men resident in Hong Kong 
(except serving Members of His 
Majesty's Forces) who have 
had any decoration conferred on 
them please notify the Chief 
Clerk, Colonial Seerctariat, not 
later than Tuesday, 12th Aug. 
1947, stating the year in which 
the decoration was conferred. 


COLONIAL SECRETARY. 


Lower. Albert Road, 
Hongkong, GOth July, 1947, 


THE HONG KONG 
‘JOCKEY CLUB 
Notice to. Members 

' Double Tenth Race 

_Meeting, October 1947. 


Tickets (at $4-“ench) ,for 
the Special Cash Sweep on, the 
“Kwangtung ‘Handleap"’ which 


can be obtained at the ‘office pf 
the Treasurers, lat ‘Floor, Ex- 
change Bullding, .and ‘also .at 
the Branch Office in’ Nathan 
Road, Kowloon — over 50,000 
Tickets sold to dato, ae 


‘By Order, 
S.A. SLEAP,'. 


ie 


The date of returning com. 


‘redoubling efforts and’ sanitary 


.|| KOWLOON WHARF & |SHANGHAI BANKIN ERNMENT 
ADVERTISING ||| ‘Gonown co. trp. |(SHANGHAL BANKING) GOV. anmntiagd Ad st ew | lm. 7 
Woe BROWN COs: ( OR IN. |... EDUCATION. | Cc R Hy d At a i | t 
Aoi GAEL || noice zo - (ANE Snare, Peres | Gase Recalled At Trial |mmigrants 
INSERTION, ADDITIONAL || | SHAREHOLDERS, — | dend of 2. 0. 0. per shars (nett / NOTICE i The trial of four Japanese Gendarmes before No.7 |@ 24 Dt, ae: 
WORDS 10 CTS. PER WORD| |” — EAS cron Prema tae). nee ns NORTHCOTE ; ae , War’ Crimes: ar which was terminated Set Riddle: "7 
. : ‘NOTICE is-hereby, given tha : "0 cai ' 1 ‘de ; : 3 
gp he futratth Graany, Soesal| een deca roe’ tte] TRAINING Communists) rei ge wy. Ze Sete defence [OUD ee 
scat a eae ‘1947, at a rate of 1/2 27/82d. COLLEGE sion to retire from the case, was resumed yes- |Port Du Bouc, July.29... . 


. oa . e - 
Tighten. Grip|a 
Bucharest, July 29. 
The Rumanian Cabi- 
net today dissolved the 
‘opposition National Pea- 
sant Party and the Par- 
liament ratified the Cabi- 


dat made while the case was - still! time went on, these subordinates|:. : . 
net decision by a vote of| open, but pointed out that the| did show slgns of deteriorating |iM.’,Marseilles, said here 
294 to one.. : case, having been conducted in| but he cautioned (hem and gave| tonight. - : aa oe 
into accordance ' with Jegal: procedure, | them advice. . : . The refugees, from the ship 


The dissolution will go 
cffect’ tomorrow when the de- 
erce is published in the official 
Gazette whercupon. o'l party 
headquarters’ will be sealed, 
-files tnken over by the Ruman- 
fan authorities and the party's 
administrative apparatua Haqui- 
dated. 

It is relinbly reported that 

Ju'iue Maniu, President of the 
issclved party, waa removed 
today from his nephew's home 
where he was held) incommuni- 
cada “under examination” and 
ees under formal arrest jin 
abl. 
The Minister of the Interior, 
Tcohuri Georgescu, in a state- 
‘ment to Parliament, -nccused: 
Mania of -having “directed the 
Party'a efforts in action meant 
to diminish national sovereiyn- 
ty, te endanger pence and to 
.Mtart on oclvi! war’? 

Georposcu: charged that dur- 
Ing the November (1946) clec- 
tions, the Peasant Party “tried 
to foment rfots, murders and 


could not 


tol that 


necused, 
At the 


Yutaka to 
defending 


Court for 


change 
granted. 


g 


the people's will and to create 
a pretext for foreign interven- 
tion.”—United Press, 


U.S. War: 
Chiefs Meet 


Washington, July 30." 

The ‘Navy's top expert on 
atomic bombs, Admiral William 
H. OP, Bland, —_ partictpated 
on Tucadny at a aceret top level 
Army and Navy conference, 
feuding, to unofficial speculation 
that he may direct some new 
A-bomb tests. There was: no 
confirmation. . 
Jamca V. Forrestal, Secre- 
tary of the Navy, who soon. is 
to tke the oath as the Nation’ 
firet Secretary of Defence, re- 
fused to discuss the purpose 
with reporters. Secretary of 
War Kenneth Royall delayed a 
trip to Germany in order to at- 
tend, Also present waa Fleet 
Admiral William D. Leahy, 
Chief of Staff to President 
Harry- Truman. — Aassoclated 
Press. pe BIER ie 


Polio Outbreak 
In Japan 


Yokohama, July 29. 
Twenty-eight . pollomyelitis 
eases, of which nine were of a 
mild non-paralytic type, but 
three rosulting fatally, have 
been, reported thia year among 
the oceupation forees, largely 
around the Yokohama und Tokyo 
ares, . 

Announcing this; the Eighth 
Army headquarters sald that as 
a: precaution, the . children's 
wading pool at Yokohama hay 
how been vloged. 

» Army houpitals are using every 
modern resource to combat the 
disease, Including the Kenney 
method, and GHQ = specialists 
have sect up a special ward in the 


scl, 


difficulties 


though ‘it 


members 
were 


prevalling 
Ushiyamn' 


relleving 
also 


Ushiyam 


atill in 
it last. 


also dealt 
at the. 


selling and 


terday, with a new defen 


: Yukio, first accused, alleged that-much he had 
wished to say had “been left out in his-ex- 
amination-in-chief, He 
Court whether it.was 
chan 
‘The President told Ushiyama 
that it wor perfectly permissible 
for a change 


the very gravest reasons. 

Whon the Court sat on July 22, 
Mr. Murata appiled for permission 
to withdraw from the case on the 
ground that he felt it very cssen- 


should. have the confidence of the 


hearing, the 
the accused that pormission had 
been granted for Mr. 


Ushiyama apologised to the 


and the other accused had caused 
ehd expressed gratitude over the 
fact that their appiicntion for a 
of counsel 


‘Ushiyama, together with Sgts. 
Major Ishiyama 
Sakuzo and Matsuyni a “Hiroshi | Nght, 


ire jointly 
oncerned ‘in the ill-treatment. of! responsibility for the cleanliness 


persons In custody at the Western 
District Gendarmerie Henadquar- 
all sorts of mischief in order} ters between Dec, 30, 1041, and 
to prevent a free expression of | Feb. 17, 1945, ‘ 


factory. : . ’ '  Jsatd the refugees had also re- 
. Hoaring ‘will be resumed at 10/ fused an offer to have the sick 
Deterioration: a.m. today,’ ‘ taken ashore.—Reuter, 


In answer to questions put. to 
hhin by his newly appointed Coun. 
Ushlyama 
Kempei, Auxiliary Kempel and 
Police Force deteriorated gradual- 
Jy: with the passing of time...In 
the face of ever increasing prices 
of commodities and owing to the’ 


porting thelr respective families, 
they ‘negiccied thier duties, 


‘intention to work Industriously.. 
Ushivamn suid that in an effort 
to allevibte the hardships which 


suffering, he opened. a 
Canteen, where different commo. 
dities wére sold at half the price 
‘in the open 


fcully'in securing these commodi- 
tles. -‘As-'ts further step towards 


instrumental 
employment for famlly members, 


which was dropped. by an Ameri. 
cun. base plune in the compound 
of the Central Police Station on 
Jan, 16, 1948; did-not explode and 
he consequently belleved it to be 
the carth where he saw 


Ushiyama 
tlon facilities were, provided at 
Centro] Police Statlon for the 
beneftS-of prisoners and that two 
or three rrisoners were allowed 
to have a bath at one time. . Pri. 
soners were also permitted 
‘wash thelr clothes at the same 


{ime as they had @ bath. : Dells ident . economic ‘: (DIRECT... 
‘| crisis and nowaprint shortage at Ps NUFACTURERS’ © 

Murder Case least one phase of life moves MA 
along normolly—tetters to “Tho REPRESENTATIVES .. 


Ushiyoma sold that apart from 
hunding bribery cases, Ishiyama| . 


Shanghai 
Bork as well as the murder case 
in which the wife of Sir, Shouson 
Chow, © well.known Chinese re- 
sident, was murdered. 
also effected the arrest of certain 
Chinese who were engaged in the 


Refusal. of the. 4,500 
immigrants on, board the 
three. British atom olf - 
this, port to land -in. 
Teor Pid See the France. has created: -'a 
Permissible to have a | problem that. will Bave 
the trust placed In him. ‘\to be - solved:at’ cabinet 
chief subordinates wero “ot the|level, Mr: S. E. Kay, the 
same ‘callbre as Ishlyama. As! British © Consul-Gencral 


ding counsel... 
hearing on July 21, Ca tain - Ushiyama 


e of counsel. 


of counsel to bo 


be re-opened without President Warfield, were sent 
back to France after they .hin 
tried unsuccessfully to- land: in 
Palestine Inst week, ie 
’ Mr. Kay, . who viilted> the 
transports with M. Colnveri, the | 
Sceretary General -6f the 
Bouches Du Rhone Department, 
sald that if the refugees con.» 
tinued to slt Ught the problem 
ould be “exclusively British,” 
M. Colaveri brought the im- 
migrants an official invitation 
from the French Government 
to Jand: in France. : 

On the first ship which ho 
visited, the Ocean Vigour, a 
JewOh spokesman replied; + 

“Toll France we are grateful, ‘ 
but we are former membera of 
the resistance who fought Ger- . 
many and want to go to Pales- 
tine, We shall not land. here 
aliva” einen - 

-M, Colaverl said the Immi. 
grants had at Jeast enough alr 
‘and space to move ‘about, 

The - Press Attache to the 
British Consulate in Marseilles 


Saw Nothing 


Ushtyama declared that ‘he did 
not belleve that’ any of his chict 
subordinates deteriorated to the 
extent that thoy forgot themselves 
ord IlLtreated suspects, He had 
never ceon or heard of any cases 
of 21l.treutment and’ did not. ve. 
Neve that such Itreatment ever. || 
took place, Under Japanese re. | 
gulations, interrogations could be 
carried out at all times. During 
aly ralds, when the black out 
order had to be enforced, no 
interrogations were cnrried out at 
night.. 

. From the end of 1943, only one 
electric light was allowed in the 
compound of Central FPollce 
Station. 

* He did. not know $f any inter. 
rogatilons were carried out at 


the defending counsel 


outset of yesterday's, 
President informed 


Tanaka 
take over the duties of 
counsel. 


the trouble which he 


had been 


Kakue, : Morino 


charged with being, Ushlyama sald that he accepted 


of the cells in which prisonors 
were detained. Whenever he snw 
the cells, the conditidn was satis. 


caid that the 


‘Drastic Measures. 
In Palestine. 


Bee Jersualem, July 29; oy 
Powers ‘enabling the British Army to ‘destroy : 
houses used by terrorists.in their attacks on 2 
feguet forces are announced in a decree. :. 
pa ‘af bo ng ‘ “ Bol 
Such’ measures were. used .against the Arab revolt 
ecient : a | rab revolt 3 
Fre erent |, of 1936 to 1939, but this.is the first = time: that - 
‘they have béen used ‘in’ the present ~ terrorist’? « 
‘wave. - : Ma : ; e 
British troopa were -today 
warned that the Irgun Zval 
Leumi group might attempt to 
Kidnap o third soldier to. Join 
Sergeants: Mervyn Palco and 
Clifford Martin. 
“The. threo — terrorists—sen- 
tenced to death for their part 
in ‘the gaol break at Acre. last 
May-—were executed at Acre}. 
today. and later buried in Safad, 
in ‘northern’ Palestine.. 
Irgun Zvai Leum{ members 
tonight toured shops, cafes and 
cinemas’ in’ Tel~Aviy. ordering 


And Who's . 
Face Is” Red 


London, July 30. 


encountered in sup. 


‘al. 
‘Wag undoubtedly’ thelr |. 


of 


owner'to close their premises? 
Immediate'y aga “mark of: ress 
pect” for the three terrorists 
executed, . 
Most owners obeyed sunder 
threat of - physical ‘violence,— 
Reuter, i ‘ : 


1 


market, 
that ‘he had great dif. 


the situntion, he was 
In obtaining 


a. said’ that a bomb 


declared that ablu. 


n\-Get in fouch.- 
\W. with 
‘THE LIVE: 


to 


Times.” 
The paper. found space In its 
acrobre _ editorial pags for’a 
letter .from 8. Knowles | who 

‘wiate: “At Waterloo .I saw ro-| 
cently piled up on the platform 
nurrow Visas Jabe'led ‘live lobs-|. 
tera." How long these creatures 

had been nailed up. and: how 
long they would remaln-so I do 
not know but this ‘seems to:mo]’ 


“IN AUSTRALIA 
_- Welteor cable: 
FEDERATED, HARDWARE . CO. : 
-* HO Queen St, BRISBANE, 
Qavenstind;:- AUSTRALIA 
sable: Address." 


with the robbery case 
Commercial 


Ishiyama 


cating of human ficsh, 


AGIet wlallon hospital to handlé| isniyama and “Boring adopted | © barbaroua: und deplorable}. EDARCO" BRISBANE 
ea a kind and-just attitude towards oes Pr pre Ben 


“~The * health authorities . are 


precautions: to protect GIs.— 
United Press, ’ 


. 


Just In Case. ~ 
Measures: 


oe 


suspects - during 
Matsuyama was also ‘kind . and 
gave both cigarettes and cakes to 
suspects while they were’ being 
interrogated, Ushlyama sald he 
| praised Matsuyama for being kind 
to suspects, . : a 


: Cross.examined, Ushiyama said 
that he trusted ‘Ishiyama and was 
sure that the. latter did not abuse 


interrogations, 


Ete, ° 
: . ie . | Share’ Register as the holders of 
we Also. | thp.-90,000- issued ‘shares: in the 
1 Calculating ' Machine : 


.. {Capital “of 
1 Tientaln Carpet 8x 10’ jin. . the 
/ °, @.Indfan. Carpets 9°°x,6' 
: 1: Treuding Sewing -Machino 
1 Australlca: Ico’ Chest 
A Green. Lambs-wood Carpet 
94) x THE 
-1, Dining- Room, Suite i pees, . 
1 Weatinghousd Refrigerator 
1 Electric. Stiye |). - ‘ 


shareholder is entitled, and such 

offer, Jf not .accepted-elther on{: 
behalf of such ,shnreholder: or 

his: nominee .on. or'“before 31st 
'December, 1847, will be: doemed 
to be'declingi, 

. Any of the slarea which shall 
‘|not, be. taken: up . by tho ‘Com- 
pany’s “Shareholders in “mannor 
aforesaid shall be :disposed of in 
such .manner and at such time 


ied _ Wéshington,, July 29. SOR aoe ata Se ; oe 7 
. War Department officials ea: A. a pea ono ene 
today that routine’ plans ‘have |’. Max Planck - 
“g pe aan aoe arts Pipa Nae ats alee ean. hat an fe 
-tion of ‘Americons from China}. ‘=. London, 20. : 
: a Korea in the event ‘of. al' : Professor. Bex Planck, Ce : 
erlais.” eee (8 Pyear-old, German atomle phystl- 
. They: emphasised . that « the} ciat-and Nobel Prize winnor, .[s 
plone -are-part of the standard 
procedure for .the.protection of | -has. not becn, 
: ‘German: donas!- 


7 Act? Secretary, 


ew | shares: 
t “to. th 


1 Mullard. Radfo. 2, or, times: and. upon auch: terms|: t : nto’ is! : : , r.-Chrlatophiér. 
-. 1 Philips Radi as the Company's ‘Directors stall | ‘cxitoring a Q E : e1 e : *e 
«1 Radlo : oF ie thelr, nbsoltite “dfacrotion sea] essential.” .thnt BERS | "0 s stated 
_” Oni View ‘Frei: Thared ‘ dance! Batanags oad "auger 
Blot’ July’ 1847 ey HE: BOARD | Gane’, (Saturday, 2nd . August, 


“‘Becretary, 


CTORS; erode 


19 


LABOUR CABINET. CRISIS — 
Differences Over Policy In Economic Tangle 
‘Slash In Armed 3 sae = 
Forces Possible 


7 ; London, July 29. 
The official announcement on. 


' AT 2.80, 5.16, 
LU EE N|S Babee 


Pur Osea Comcleteots 


SHOWING 
TO-DAY 


vor 
: eo. 


= 
a 


# LOVE with 
: a Tranche 


aera whe. i 
RUSSIAN INVASION| Families 


am gece oe te IEly To New| 
Zealand — 


(The World) reported today 
Auckland, July’ 30. - 


that a auddew invastom of - 
Ruantan ‘cigarettes crashed the 

Three Glasgow . families ar- 
rived by American aircraft on 


American cigarette black - 
market driving. the price 
Tucsday to make thelr homes 
in the Dominion. ye \ 


meeting” of the Parliamentary Labour Party d 

that ‘Field.’ Marshal Viscount Montgomery, ise ae a es 

Chief of the Imperial General Staff, ‘has can- coffee likewise declined — 

celled his yisit to sop and is hurrying home United Press, \ 

from New Zealand, linked with reports that : 

The party of 14 members 

paid £8,000 tb make the 14,000 
mite journey from Britain by 
air in five doys instead of wait- 
ing indefinitely for sen passage. 


a slashing of Britain’s armed forces may be ee 
Bail In 
They are Major and Mrs, 


forced on the Government.. . 
, E 
Warbride KE™ 
‘ John Mackenzie, with thelr, 15 “IOAN LESLIE-JANIS PAIGE $.2. 


While the War Office merely gave “pressure of 
d Cc SAKALL-PATTI BRADY _. 
‘ yeny old, daughter; Mr. and Hey er DAVIQ BUTLER OmOrN scmcen Ler wr crams Horrmn ahaa s Damon + 
Murder Case Mrs. James Stoddart with thelr ‘ALSO LATEST GAUMONT BRITISH NEWS: 


business: in London" as the reason, the sud- 
Crestview, Florida, July 30. -) three children and Mr. and Mrs. | grog, Returna to London; British Car Scores World Record; 


den decision has placed in the spotlight the 
major problem confronting the Prime_Minis- 
British warbride, Mra. Mar-| Gordon Hodge with. their 10 . : reat Vogt , 
scaret Irene Poland, was on| yenr old son. Wee ee To-morrow; O!l From’ Kuwalt;. Sporting High 


ter, Mr. Clement Attlee—the growing demand 
Tucaday at Hberty for the first}” Accompanying them were 
— TO-MORROW —— 


ADVANCE BOOKING orrice, 
ST, FRANCIS HOTEL, QUEEN'S RO. 
-"Booking Houra: 11.00-a.m. to 5.30 ‘pam. Wally’ 


FINAL 4 SHOWS TO-DAY 
‘At 2.30, 5.15, 7.30'& 9.39 p.m. é 
PEAR rue COMMOTION, OCEAN 4, - 
b FRom OCEAN T? we . 


the eve of the “erisis 
ER ROC SP DENNIS MORGAN 6 
oN IMK CARSON Se 
TA GUYS FRO: 
jiwo MILWAU! <E 


JEAN PIERRE AUMO 
+ ADOLPHE MENJOU 


FREE GIFT! A bottle of ‘HEARTBEAT PERFUME! (made 
by SHULTON INCORPORATION—Sole Agents in H.K.—TON- 

-LEY & CO.) will be given away free nt each performance, to 
the holder's Ucket number corresponding to {the: tleket stud 
A Result of cach drawing will be posted in: the theatre 
lobby, 


‘the winter crisis that crippled industrial pro- 
- duction earlier this year. ‘ ; 

Aw discussions among high-] cut In the armed forces fs the 
ranking Ministers of the Govefn- | only way to allaviate the dollar 
ment continue, the Labour Party | crinis sufficiently quickly to avert 
rank and file were weething with 


for drastic steps to’ alleviate the manpower 
shortage, which is threatening a renewal of 
time alnee her arrest last week | Miss Agnes Mackenzie, a retir- 
for the shooting of her. hus-[ed school mistress, and Mra. 


a ited 


AGM 
—— GREGORY PECK 
Ta ee D ors 
PICCOLO 
with x ‘ 
Donald CRISP - Lionel BARRYMORE - Preston FOSTER - Marsha HUNT 
GLADYS COOPER - REGINALD OWEN -.DAN DURYEA + JESSICA TANCY 
. BARBARA EVEREST +» MARSHALL THOMPSON 
t “ADDED: LATEST MirKU-NuwS 
°X'T CHANGE ¢ VAN JONNSON * JUDY GARLAND 
NEX? CHANGE $y ANK SINATRA * JUNE ALLYSON 
Robert WALKER * Kathryn GRAYSON * Van HEFLIN 


- “TILL THE CLOUDS ROLL BY” 
IN TECHNICOLOR! A Metro.Goldwyn-Mayer Picture 


mechs aren 


Spies) 


stOumn COMFORTABLE GRATE 
- At 2.30, 6.20, 
7.80 & 9.30 pom, 
’ 


Errol) FLYNN * Alexia SMITH * Alun HALE in 


“GENTLEMAN JIM” 


AHAL B. WALLIS PRODUCTION” 


"> Oimweled by MICHAEL CURTIZ ” 


os ‘Protect ‘your’. cash 
',°, against loss “and 
"theft ....Boforo you. 


Safor than cash,’ pee 
Promptly; refunded, if ‘lost 
--@ |: Spendablo‘ anywhere 


rumvurs of {mpending Cabinet ce- 
shuflles Involving the Prime 
Minister's own position as well as. 
that of the Foreign Sceretary, Mz. 
Ernest Bevin, and othe Lord 
President of the Council, Mr. Her- 
bert Morrison, who j« Britain's 
chief Planning Minister. 

One rumour, among the Leftist 
members, was that the Right- 
wingers would formally move thht 
Mr. Attlee should resign the 
leadership and hand over to Me, 
Bevin, ‘ 

Another claimed that | the ‘per- 
sonol attack oon Mr. Attles's 
Jendership ino the pro-Government 
marvelreulatiin Daily Mirror, 
hid been jnvpired hy Mr. Mor. 
rizon, 

Sober-absergers are not inclined 
tu take these reports seriously, 
hut theyengrve in regarding them 
ts mich more significant than the 
lust wave of reshuille reports tn 
the sprimg, it os 

Behind the welter of conflicting, 
information, there nre uwe certain 
facts, Ore ja that, owing to the 
dolar erida, the present Govern: 
ment $e confronted with the nee.t 
of annking ap ite mind quickly on 
a puntber of, derisive issues whieh 
it hos, so tar cehelved, 

The other is that, under thir 
pressure, differences within the 
Cubinet, whieh have so far pres |, 
vented a decision. have beeome n+ 
commas subject of — discussion. 


trmone the Governinent’s Parlin- 


mentary supporters, 
“Food Before Forces” 
Relief among the Party's solid 
tride unlon following that o big 


ROARING, ADVENTURE! 


TO-DAY ONLY 


A cot 


~ COMING SOON 
‘TO THE - 


Levtiede 
VICTORY. 


SHOWING TO-DAY | 
At 2.80, 6.10,'7.20 & 9.80 pam. 


/ 8.000 .MILES” |: 


DIALOGUE" IN MANDARIN 


a drastic reduction of. .thepeople's 
standard of living hoa hardened 
in recontwocks under the slogans 
“Food wfore Forces’ and 
“Rather a prosperous Sweden 
than bankrupt Great Power.” 
These demands are being. sun 
ported Increasingly by most of 
the Ministers concerned 
economic policy, including, it 
betievel, Mr Morrison,. the 
Chancellor of the Exchequer, 
Mr. Hugh Dalton, and Mr. George 
Isanes, as well as by outspoken 
Loftwingers in the Cabinet. such 
ns Mr, Ancurin Bevan, the 
Minlater of Health, and Mr. Em- 
inanuel Shinwell, the Minister of 
Fuel and Power, but they have 
so far been steadfastly opposed 
by the Prime Minister as incon 
patible with the discharging of 
Britain's responstbilitles in, the 


with 


post-war world. 


Ao sxecond ‘issue-—methods 
achieve a better 
Rritish | manpower 


to 
distribution of 
at home—is 


tprebably nearer an agreed .solu~ 


tion, The,Cabinet will have , to 
present ite proposals to a meeting 
of the Nationnl Joint Advisory 
Council of . Trade Union leaders 
and employers’ ‘representatives 
on August 6, and ty certain to 
stick to a policy of differentint 
advantuges for the undermanned 
industrles, 


More Austerity 
A ‘third issue is created by the 
campaign for a cutting down of 
Government expenditure for social 


ws]. 


band. 
Shortly after a formal charge 


< 7 


of murder was filed against her |. 


met and the: 21-year-old Manx 


Christina -MacKenzic, 28, sister 
and iother of Major 
Kenzie, and Mra, Helen Stod- 


on Monday night, her bail waa} dart, 84, mother of Stoddart.— 


waman was, released pending 
connidération of the charge by 
the Grand Jury on August 26. 
The bond’ standing security 
for Mra. Potand’s bail wos 
signed by «two men, Tom 
Brooks, owner of summer cot- 
tages ot Fort, Walton holiday 
resorty‘and Oscar Bengston, a 
police constable, — Associated 
Prerr, ¢ ; 


PURELY PERSONAL 


New York, July 29. 

John Bocttiger, publisher in 
Phoenix, Arizona, and hia wife, 
Anna, daughter of the tate Pre. 
sident, departed for Oslo, todny, 
abonrd a Scandinavian Airlines 
plane. 

They said at LaGuardia Pield 
that they were going purely on 
personal business and said. they 
did not .know how tong they 
would remain in Norway.—vUnit. 
ed Press, 


STATUS REGAINED 


services, foud subsidies and houwa- | 


ing, waged for some time now in 
In ependent papers like . “The 
Times,” on the ground that only 
s reduction of purchasing power 
can qchieve the . necessary con- 
traction of imports without 
threat of internal Inflation, - 

This Is firmly rejected by the 
majority of the Cubinct, not only 
for political and social reasons, 


but also as unlikely to have the 


desired economic effect In° a-situa- 
tion where Jarge numbers of peo- 
ple could fall back on savings to 
avoid a cut In their oxpenditure. 
‘It would, most Ministers  be- 


Neve, exaspernte the workers and, 


discourage the production 
without really” oats 
demand for imports, 

Slr Stafford Cripps, ‘howovor, ia 
credited with being in sympathy 
for such proposals as part of a 
Renoral programme of confront. 
Ing the -nation with ‘sacrifices 
which he believes to be inevitable. 

A fourth Issue concerns tho 
future of the Government's na- 
tionalisation programme. 

The natlonalsation of the iron 
and stecl industries ‘jn Britain 
has been thrown into the melting 
pot again by the pressure -of a° 
section of opinion which urges 
that the risk of obstruction by tho 
leaders of one of Britain's most 


reducing 


‘crucial Industries should not ‘he 


run in the present emergency, 
rennet Ken BU é 
Morrison with the Initiative 
TO-DAY, Fy 
‘0. MORROW 
SPECIAL, 


Mr. 
In 


Ec TERROR FULL OF. THRILLS! =| 
“DEAD OF NIGHT” | 
"+", Distributed by EAGUE-LION 

— COMMENCING SATURDAY — | — |. 

“FOR. WHOM ‘THE BELL TOLLS" | |. 


. _ San Francisco, July 30. 

The wife of the British Con- 
sul at San Francisco, Mrs. A 
J, De La Mare, has just regain- 
ed her American citizenship. 
Sho lost it because she voted, 
in the British general election 
in 1046, 

That's the law for Americans 
—no voting in foreign elec- 


| 


|) FINAL 


Associated Press. . 


Beauty Parlour 
Explosion | 


Harrisonburg,, Virginia, 
eduly 29. 

An explosion in a downtown 
beauty parlout rocked the town 
today and at least two persons 
wore reported to have been kill- 
ed and 60 injured. 

The blost demolished the 
beauty ‘parlour, and wrecked 
part of an adjoining jewellery 
store and another  bualness 
house. ee 

The police believe an expto- 
sitn of gaa in the rear of the 
building caused the biast— 
United Press, 


CENTRAL THEATRE 


. SHOWING TODAY AT 
12.80, 2.30, 6.15, 7.15, 9.15 


EPISODE 


tions.— Associated Press; —-~ {> 


discussions with: leaders. of tho 
British stecl industry, to whom 
he is said to have suggested that 
the Government might be content 
with a mere “enabling bill”. under 
which it would nationaliso only 
stecl undertakings which proved 
inefficient, g ; 

Behind these issues there 
stands the shadow of “coalition’— 
the hope of Conservatives and the 
fear of Labour ‘supporters that 
the Government may, under ‘a 
similar threat of crisis, abandon 
its programme and share power 
with the Conservatives as: Me. 
Ramsay MacDonald did in 1031. 
But such an outcome fs iImprob- 
able today, when Labour has a 
safe Parliamentary majority, - 

It {s° fnore Jkely’ that. the 
Labour leaders will seek, at all 
costs, to settle thelr differences 
in their.own circle. Their pros- 
poets Of so doing depends most of 
all on tho first issuo—tho cuts in 
the armod forces.—Reuter. 


C 


“At 2.80, 520, 
7.20 & 9.20 pan.’ 
| onan 


IN‘ TECHNICOLOR!: |. : 


pip se 
MY: ¢ 
“DESIGN MOD 


la 


ale 
SPERING] 


". RO-MORROW | 


. ‘SAMUEL GOLDWYN .*; 
PRESENTS...’ 


SPITFIRE } 


1 te 
"Sint 


ERA 
at 


wl 


Mac- }. 


Leslie HOWARD’ | 


STARRING 


ADOLPHE, 


MENJOU . 


‘ 


with Carle LANDIS’ ond John HUBBARO. - 


” 


cote Storing RAY... RUTH 


THCATR 


20 & 9.20 P.M. 


PN, UNINVITE 


_ ww MILLAND+ HUSSEY CRISP 


_ CORNELIA OTIS SKINNER: 


1A Porenewet Piers) ' 


cat MMT aOR Tp Manag RN 
it 


a Bs neee Lay 


“hOGA 


nie 


SI 
= 


AIRBANKS 


innstadog BAIL RUSSELL | 


_ Directed by tewts Allens Screen Play by Codie Smith ond Frank 


Parton 


_ DONALD 


) - FRANS 
NEXT FLIGHT: * 


HONG KONG TO BANGKOK . Friday, lat August 
HONG KONG TO MANILA ...... «Ist & 2nd August 
HONG KONG TO BANGKOK.. Tueaday, Sth Auguat 
HONG KONG TO MANILA .........-+- 5th and 6th August 


For Ppssage and Freight apply to:— Secret 
SOUTH EAST ASIA TRADING CO. (SIAM) Ltd. 
69, Connaught Road West. Tel. 24292, 
or FAR EAST AVIATION CO:: LTD. 

Tor Floor, Nationat City Rank of N.Y, Bldg. Tel. 27260. 


(Entrance on Dyddell Street). 


- * ; 
| Ir F rance- 
(FRENCH OVERSEAS AIRWAYS) 


NEXT AIRCRAFT LEAVING 
’ 


AUGUST 6th 
SPATS AVAILABLE FOR’ SAIGON, CAIRO, TUNIS, ROME, 
CASABLANCA, TANGIERS, PARIS, LONDON, GENEVA, 
COPENHAGEN, OSLO, STOCKHOLM AND VARIOUS 
OTHER CENTRES ‘THROUGHOUT EUROPE 


THROUGH TICKETS ISSUED TO wae 
NEW YORK. RIO DE JANEIRO, AND BUENOS AIRES 


FARES ‘ i 
BAIGON . LONKS 492.35 0 PARIS... . HKS3.010,60 
CAIRO... MKS3258.80 NEW YORK... HKS1390.00 
ROME HI¢s2815.00 © 1HO DE JANEIRO HKS4.857.00 


TO ALL DESTINATIONS 


FREIGHE ACCEPTE 


/ For Particulars Apply To 


CIE DES MESSAGERIES MARITIMES 


Queen's Bultding Tcl. 26651 (three nes). 


SERVICE FOR PASSENGER & FREIGHT | 
NEW TARIFF FROM DATE 


HONGKONG 

TO (FARE) 
AMOY ....... ...Tues.,, Thurs, & Sat. ...,, HKS$170.~ 
CHUNGKING  .....Sun. ven venikoae Feo xe te 


- 200.- 


SHANGHAI : - 350.- 
ALL VIA CANTON utecseeereten ote . 356 


Special low rate for Baggage & Freight 
FREE BAGGAGE ALLOWANCE 30 Kilos 


OFFICES:— 


HONGKONG . KOWLOON | 
Shell House Peninsula Hotel 
Tels:——23278-27811 Lobby 
Tel. 58938 


27855 


hiss 
LU b 


Tye LLL LEED 
sara aa 


: Why Travel By PA L? 
You get ~~ ; o me oo 
: Safety. = 


“Service 


CHINA MAIL| 


Windsar House 


Tolephoncs: 


Editors :... ws. 26354 


oe oN 


THE CHINA MAIL THURSDAY, JULY. 81,, 1947. 


pis _ By Arthur Morley - .. 
‘Managing Edjtor; W.J. Keate Reet ee tl 

anaging Editor; W.d. Keates. |. Sydney......Biggest Pacifle de-! ang Prince Fatafehl, ‘(24 years,” sional su 
_| Business Manager: W. H. Nolloth. 


Py ‘ 


velopment of recent weeks is tha 
decision by the Australian For. 
eign Minister, Dr. H. V. Evatt, to 
fly to Tokyo shortly for a sories 
of , conferences 


92 stone), were married to their! Washing 
third cousins, daughter, of nolgh. ~ 

bouring chieftains. ‘or = six| ' URANIUM: 
months, 


ton. 
a acts - 


Reporters & Gonoral Officg, 8281% | MacArther and ranking America| paince women in accordance with! that the Australian Pilme Minis. 


(four Ilnos) 
‘ Subseription Rates: . 


'"S'months .. oe... H.K.§18.00 
6 months a . FLK.$36.00 
One year ....... H.K.$72.00 


milltary, 

authorities there; 
There is more to 

than meets thb oye. 


Dr. Evatt says he wants to dis-} according to the rites of the] in developing what might be ono|' 
cuss the carly re-entry of Japan| yethodist Church, and ‘tho|of the British ‘Empire's greatest] ’ 
couples| sources of the basic matorial- of"): 


into world trado—tho Australian 


-y | menial 
fhe, Journey | guts and candle-nuts. 


political sind ceonomle} Tongan traditions, with -cerd-|'ter, Mr. J. B, Chifley, 1s consider. | ’ 


aoep made from cocoa-| ing taking over all. uronium’min- 
0 ;|ing in tho Dominion. This step 
The wedding was performed | wil] ensuro secrecy and efficiency 


minister handed = the 


eoecocerecooeooeoe 090s | Government isn't happy about the] cables of greeting and congratu-| atomic power. 


DEATH 


ANNETT—At 
Hospltal on July 30, after a 
brief {llness, Edward John, 
nged 24, beloved son of Mr. 
‘and Mrs. M. A. 


ment at 4.30 p.m. today. 


BIRTH. 


WHEEN—To Galle and Lestle on 
the 20th July. 1947 in Shang. 
hai, oa daughter, 
Kathleen, 


INDONESIA 

“Te is with the keenest dis- 
appuintment that His Majesty's 
Government have witnessed the 
break-down of their ceaseless cf- 
forts during the last 18 months 
to promote a peaceful settlement.” 
That phrase, in the statement 
issued by the British Foreign Of- 
fice at the moment of the opening 
of the Dutch military action in 
Tudonesia, was restrained in tone | 
ay befitted an official announce: | 
ment, Afr Ernest Bevin, the 
British Foreign Secretary, in’ the 
Huuse of Commons three days 
Inter spoke of the “keenest regret” 
with which he had learned of the 
decision of the Netherlands Goy- 
ernment. “That incidentally 
futed the sugpestion which has 
been deliberately circulated that 
the British Government had: ap- 


amali number of Australlan busi-| jation trom the British Govern. 
nessmen allowed intp Japan un-| ment, 


acer the American scheme, Dr 


Queen Mary's Evatt also wants to discuss long-| a, 


term plans for 


Jupan. 


But, most of all, Dr. Evatt-and! gan Royal Family during his 
Annctt,| *2e Australian Government are| famous voynge of 1777, The tor- 
Funeral will pass the Monu.| appalled by the sword-rattling of} tgise, now venerated os a semi. 
‘oeaceful” post-war Europe and] god, was so disturbed by 
are straining evory nerve to pre-+ and trampling of 


wont ao similar “peace” in the 
Pacific, He will seek from Gen. 
eral MacArthur a clear definition 
at America’s Pacific Peace: Tatks 
preposals, Including 


Natalie |disiribution of former Japanese] the 
| territories within the United Na.| labourers’ strikes on record, The islands since Jopan recelved the 
the 'extent to] liner Malaita, londing bales of| Mandate from the old League of 


tlona framework, 


which Japan Is to be allowed tol rubber at Port Moresby, took on| Natlons 25 years ago. 


reporatlons,| singing, this week produced 


considering a report by sclontine 
Most. dissatisfied guest—tho| experts on the thorium content of 
god and bilnd lnnd tortolse| sea-sand off the Queensland and 


demilitarising | (estimated age 200) which Cap-| New South Wales const. This is 


tain Cook presented to the Ton-| extremely hush-hush, . 
* . o. 1 
’ EXPLORATION: Japan's so. 
singing| called “Islands of Mystery,” the 
Palace | mandated territories of the Caro. 
lines, Marsholls ond = Marianas 
where thousands of tiny islands 
U : dot the Pacific, are at long last to 
And; speaking of} be explored and examined by an 
onc of | Allied expedition. No whlte ob. 
wharf. | Kervers have been~ollowed on the 


4 the 
grounds that he hid himself. 


* ry 


STRIKE: 


most fantastic 


Many, of 


rebuild heavy industries, and the| board also her chief pnssenger,| the islands have never been ex. 


forces In Japan, 
Armed with these facts, 
Evatt will fly back to Australia 


verhups, South Africa, 
This conference 
the American proposals at length, 


that, with rensonable 
take, 


full-scale Peace Talks to follow. 


pnration the disharmonieg of the 
European Peace Talks con be 
avoided. 


ROYALTY: 


. . 


re-)- 


to the problems of world politics, 
over.at Ionga the people were 


proved the decision ‘in advance. 
Phat ‘suggestion is the very 


urging settlement by negotiation. 
Bat “disappyintment" and 
pret” are very much an under- 
statement of the effect of the 
Ditch decision on opinion in the 
British Isles. It has been shocked 
rather than “disappointed” or 
“regretful.” In the fist period 
after the Japanese surrender the 
British Government found itself 
responsible for maintenance of 


order in Indonesia. British 
troops——since there were no 
Dutch available in’ the area+— 


nid to reaccupy the islands and dis- 
arm the Japanese garrisons. They 
were against all desire involved 
in a conflict with the Indonesians 
who regarded them in the bepgin- 
ning as’simply new European in- 
vaders, It was a difficult, dis- 
tasteful situation. The ‘ troops 
had to remain until their + task 
was completed. They "were 
forced to defend themselves 
against attack, But there was 
never the slightest basis for the 
charge publicly made in. the 
Security Council of the United 
Nations that British troops were 
being used in an attempt to break 


celebrating the = first British 
Royal wedding since the War. 


blossoms in thelr hair, feasted on 


“te-| pork and fruit und. pineappics,| miles-an-hour ‘and the safcty-fac- 


singing South Sea chants in the 
gardens of good and stately (Oft. 
3ins,) Queen Salote, . 
Her two sons, the -Crown 
Prince (age 28, weight 20 stone) 


The Accident. That. 
Never Happens -_ 


London, July 29. 
For half a century a tug with 
full steam up has been -moored 
in the Thames waiting for .an 
accident that never happens. 
It’s crew of six stokes its 
fires. It’s skipper — now In his 
70's —~ hopefully scans the 
waters, It’s engine — also a 
septuagenarlan—putters sround 
the boller. aoe ; 
-But the tug never leaves the 
dock, ae 
How can such things - be? 
-Remember, this is the country 


the Lndonesian national movement 
and restore. the Dutch Coionial 
texime. On the contrary, the 
British Government ahd its re- 
presentatives in ‘Indonesia used all 
their influence to persuade the 
Dutch that ‘restoration of the old 
regime ‘was ‘impossible, that the 
licy as 
ritain 


-|ment: possible and indeed certain 


utch ‘delaye; 
nd 


ry force" if the 


el 


ewal, 


where Lincoln's Inn still pays 
ee : e 


islands: could not be entirely en- 
trusted to the Indonesians: that 
there must be «a mixed Dutch- 
Indonesian force under Dutch 
command, It was a demand very 
contrary. to British conceptions of 
self-government and to British 
practice for years past in India. 
again“ British mediation 

weest somes compro- 
would allay Dutch 
Indonesian 


Dutt t.and for away ports that all: sea 
‘of ‘ale’ in ‘waterfront .cafes, . 


future’ of the Allfed Occupation | Colonel 
Dr.) in New Gulnea, 
in time for the. British Empire} the wharf.and the local brassband| of the 
Pacific conferences in Canberra, | struck up. Immediately, the New| pology, Sydney Univeraity, a world 


to welcome delegates from Brl.j Guinea wharf.lobourers staged oa} authority on Pacific 
tain, New Zealand, Cannda and,{ sitdown strike. to Nsten to tho! The purposes of the mission ore 


American ambitions during the{| and then began work again, 


It is hoped that by careful pro.{- 


While. Canberra] velopment of a trans-Pacific alr.| prohibiting the export 
and Tokyo turned anxfous eyes! ship service to Australfa, Malaya] Merino rams. The Minister for 


Smith,| plored at all: . * : 

‘The expedition will be prepon’ 
dorately American, AuStrallo’s re. 
The local Constabulary paraded ; presentative will be Dr. A. Capell, 
Department of Anthro. 


Sydney ° Elliot 
former : Superintendent: of Police 


languages. 


music, After pleading, the Man-| almost entirely sclentife and 


will consider] agement ordered the band away.[ economic. Other American parties 


The labourers then went on| will be In the vicinity at the same 


to evolve a common British policy| strike for more music, watched time, undertaking the demiltari. 
give and! the band being marched back, sation of Japanese bases, such os 
can be reconciled with; listened to a two-hour concert—| Trulc. 


‘The Islands are scattered over 
five million square miles; popula 
tion only 60,000 (estimated), 


* ‘oe * 


TRANSPORT: With Pacific]. i 
shipping still far below require.| SHEEP: Australia {3 still de. 


ments, American and Australian| termined to maintain her pre. 
promoters are interested in* de-| eminence In woo] production by 
of stud 


and.Chinn: Each alrship-would| Commerce, Mr. Pollard, an. 
cost £4,000,000 sterling to build/| nounced this weeks that the ban 
but with’ capacity for 30 passen.] would continuo despite yepresen. 
gers plus enough cargo to fill 20 tatlons to the contrary from South 


reverse of truth, ‘The — British) seven thousand guests, clad in| railway trucks, the promoters re-| Africa and the Americas. 
Government has been untiringly| gay cottons . and with hibiscus| gard {it as a profitable proposition, 


Crulsing specd would be 75 


American Internal 
Feud : 


Washington, July 29, 
The Secretary ,of War, Ken- 
neth Royall, left for Europe to- 
day by plane in an effort: to 
settle the feud between Army 
officers and the State Depart-' 
ment over occupation policies. 
Gen. Clay and certain State 
Department officials have been 
at odds for more than a year 
over. the revival German. produc. 
ie tion considered essential to the 
an annual sum of nails for the economic recovery of Europe-— 

right to have lights in armour United Presa, j 
joust on what fs now busy Figct], 
Strect ——- five centuries after the 


last such event was, held. yy 
ry ‘Markham Roberts, 


tor, according to expert advice, 
would be greater than that of 
conventional _ heavier - than - air 
j eragt, Vice.ndmiral Charles. E. 
Rosendahl is secking ‘Congres- 


DIVORCE PLE 
ain Seattle, July 380. 
‘And the tug was ordered in| Mrs. Mai 
an Act.of-Parliament regulating| daughter of Sir.Charles Mark- 
the use of the Tower Bridge| ham of Kenya, filed application 
: for divorce in Seattle on Tues- 


By ROBERT day from Joesph Roberts, 
MUSEL Seattle publidher, ~ 
} She fs a cousin by marriage 


. . “lof Mr. Anthony E . 
across the Thames in 1894. The] British Forelgn. Fa pee ara 
bill said a tug ought to be held} ‘The actlon was an anawer and 
rendy to ald any ship which) cross-complaint’ to a divorce 
might get Into difficulties with! petition filed by Roberts “on 
the bridge. : July 9.—Associated Press, 

No ship ever has. Quite pro- : 
bably no ship ever will. The 
bridge is no more complicated 
than ony other bridgé — it just 
looks that way, So good Queen 
Victoria’s parliament decided to 
take no chances, : 

That little item in the 1894] | 
bill has cost the Corporation of 
the City -of Lendon a neat 
U.S.81,000,000 since then, at the 
rate of $400.0 week. 

By tradition the tug always 
has.27 tons of coal in its bun- 
kers, .No. one knows exactly) .«. 


why.” . 
‘Capt. Richard Hollingunl,: 78,' ° 
apends most of his time trying)’ 
‘to stave ‘off. claustrophobia, All 
day-long ships slip .by on their 
way .to Baku and Mozambique 
andTonga in the 8cuth Seas 


i e Undertakes 


captaing. chat about over mugs 


» Capt, .Holltigum.-avolds. such |" - 
places. .’ It is embarrassing to 
‘old. “sen, dog’’. to have to.ad- 
‘mit’ that he fan’t . going’. any 
‘placed ‘and probably never..will. © 
. Engineering William Adie, 72, 


, 


pport for the venture, in| 


Preliminory = aur. 1 
the brides-to-bo. have] veys nt Mount Painter, South Aus. | !|q 
with General! been bathed dally by elderly! tratia, has. proved so promising |‘ 


The Dominion Government is] , 


Offers a comprehensive service as 
“or Administrator in ° connecti 
_Intestacies and Settlements...” .. 


“You understand I don’t blamo you personally—no dovbt 
you have your orders direct from Moscow"” 


/ 


By Shepard Barclay ~ 


‘the Author! ty on Authbrities” 
TOO GOOD TO tricks by one in clubs, one In 
BID HIGH ‘hearts, two in diamonds and ont’ 


On the subject of pre-emptive 
bids, there are three main groups 
of thought, First are thoso_pjayers 
who love them, making them on 
all tempting occasions, practically 
any time they think they can take, 
enough tricks to. prevent heavy 
damage, Second, on the other ex. 
treme,*are those who sny_ they 
never make pre-emptive bids, ori- 
ginal or otherwise, no matter 
what they hold. Third, In ‘the 
middle, are those who will make 
them when holding a combina. 
tlon of enough sult length ond 
virtugly no high-card strength. 
These players consider some 
hands too good for a leaping Lena 
high bid. . 


5 ABT 
H.9 5 2 
D9842 
C842 r 
Ss. KJ 106 —§,.Q953 
wks | N ing 
DKI105)W BID 73 
C908 S |CAKQ 
JT07 
8.4 2 
HAJ 107043 
DAQGQ : 
\ C3. . 
.--. (Dealer: .-North, - East-West.vul. 
nerable.) 
North Enst South West 
1 Poss °1C'° IH 18S 
Pass 25 3H 38 
Pasa 4s. : 
2 Pass ‘1c 4H Dbl 


There you have the bidding of 
this deal {n a team-of-four match. 
South's call of 4-Hearts lost the 
hand for his side. He was sct two 


VOICE OF AMERICA 


Washington, July _30, 
An increase in “Voice of Ame- 
rica” broadcasts aimed at Mos- 
cow, with a simultancous redite- 
tion in broadcasts aimed else- 


| where, was announced by ; the 


A Complete Executorship and Trusteeship Service in the Colony of 


Hongkong. 


Hongkong & Shanghai Bank, Hongkong (Trustee 
- 


Executor,"Trustee = “ 


other’ fiduciary 


a es 


" whose experience and resouirces ae available-to it, 
“a Company’: staffed. and’ equipped ‘for’. the: 
ed. function ‘of’ administering’ estates and 


in spades, giving Enst and: West 
na total of 300 points. : 

At Table 1, where South con. 
sidered his hand good for some. 
thing other than hearts—which it 
certainly was—the heart. 9 was 
opened to the A. South returned 
his club singleton, hoping to find’ 
his partner holding the spada:A, « 
He did, and won the third trick 
with it, then led a club for South 
to ruff, That made three tricks 
for the defenso and. the dinmond 
A was then laid down for the sgt. 
ter. ‘ 

South's restraint ond sanity. at 
Table 1 therefore earned his side 
100 polnts. Added to 309 which 
his East-West tcammates scored 
at the other table, his team won 
the deal by a total of 400—just 


‘|about the difference {n merit, 


‘ Tomorrow's Problem ° 
8.K 51054 


DK Q2 
C..A Q 10 2 6 
1+ (Dealer:. South, East-West vul- 
nerable.) 
What is South’s proper proced. 


ure after West leads the diamond - 


4 against his No Trump game 
contract on this deal? 


‘ 


State Department tn Tuesday. 
Assistant Sceretary  Willlam 
Benton said the Department's 
aggregate broadcasts will be 
trimmed to 88 hours daily from 
the present 66 hours.—Asso- 
ciated Press. . 


4000000000 


ae 


’ 


BARCLAY ON BRIDGE ° 


) Lede 


ita ae oe wee! 


ee : 
. 2 : : ee, ‘ ‘ 
, Tews ‘ . be . 


"HE CHINA MAIL, THURSDAY, JULY 31,' 1047. 


ae weak ? BOLDLY BUT NOT RASHLY | : 


* yi e 

'. Feelin . awe E 

By ; é e yt, x. op Fg ug oP Oe § es i. . ree Z e. 

~-Wour diet needs this.|Vir, Creech Jones On Advances In Colonies 
' : Bee Fas! > Pi ay _ : : : 
a extra goodness. f fe Ne ee ene ee Tana 
mae s : , 1 ‘ : = 

- ier OF Power|— oe —_ 

ar raed, When you feel tired ond rans er . O' er APPEAL TO UNO ns: . , / . he: i 

‘ | % . . weak, without enthusiarm ; i a : ie : mgt: MA : ta 
for work and play, the rich, : i i p | ~ ig The Hague, July 20. ] pan a Pm ne : 

a) nourishment contained ho! , 1S @] eop es : ‘As India’s erercige of the iS TER - oN : Pye Se AO oy 
Horlicks will soon bulld you ae « 4 ‘Inidonesian, situation to. the ! FL 2 
up again, ee : London, July 29 UNO was’ awaited today, o. eae ia Fy ¥. -CPA 

- g ion. Offt kes. ae “ " . 
. British colontes in the Pacific and Ceylon were the | utr Fore OT oeriment a : ! 
+, AIL onoroy. doctore soy, |. ubject, of debate in the House of Commons | Wine nthe . ' 
* comes-from the food we eat, 5 f : : ‘saw no reason to oppose tict faa BANGKOK : ws : 
: If tho diot contains all osson- today. -—, ‘ en | move. to bring the conf BREST, JULY 29. Soy ent wales 

tial nourishing olemonts thore Mr. Arthur Creech Jones, the Colonial Ssecretary, before the Security Council RESCUE PARTIES WERE Departing Jat and 4th August ........++. Fare $528 

is balanced building with ro» _ |. amphasised that the Government's policy was | . The spokerman added ve TODAY STILL SEARCHING |- ‘ 

pa see tier a to associate the colonial people more closely erie had ro oeed the [AMONG _ SMOULDERING SINGAPORE 

we may ofton lack those es- with the Government. ; .|. Security Counclt to consider RUINS BREST FOR ue Departing let and 4th August ........... Fare $880 ‘ 

sontial oloments, . Malnya wna the first colony fn North Borneo, o new ad-| ¢he matter.—Reuter. TIMS ‘OF THE GIANT: S ; . , os 

‘ ae dealt with in the debate. Mr. | ministration had replnced the ane PLOSION LAST NIGHT IN MANILA wd Oe r 
Horlicks contains all the goodnesn of full-cream cows’ Creech Jones said that the con- chartered company, and it was _—_—_—_—_—__——— | THE 7,000 TON NORWEGIAN Depnrting 4th and 7th August eeccesecess Fare $300 
qmilk to which has boon added tho rich onorgising clusions renched with Malays|hoped that arbitration between : t NITRATE ‘SHIP OCEAN. : 
mourishmont oxtractod from malted: barloy and wheat and non-Ma'nysa about the fu-|the company and the Govern- people can acquire a sense Of) LIBERTY. ens SYDNEY * : f 
Horlicks can be made with wator only-tho milk {a in ture constitution of Malaya} ment would be heard later this|duty and service. Two-thirds of the painstaking- Book ee 
it. A drink of Horlicks every day will fortify your diet © | jehieved the Government's main | year. ‘ : “tthe process. may be a pain-|ty rebuilt parts, of the  war- jeok noy for the next aircraft ..,..... Fare $2,200 ae 
and will holp to build up the roservos of enorgy and policy of, establishing In Malayn In Hong Kong, the Legiato- ful one, but the alternative af damaged port were agaln un- : . ‘ 
vitality, on need. a atrong central government | tive Council had been modified | an Jnereasing bitternper. x“ inhabitable. : f : 5 
: ind accuring 1 basta of common {and a new municipal council Eerntgt nae ee int would Ahly mera Mer danger of Passenger & Freight Booking Agents ° 
‘ . P a “hth: 1) th Lcrented which was more repre-| peop to : casualtics gave 15 dead, but un- A : 
,. The Doctor Saye : citizenship among all the races arcu ys Ce er epre: peor iaaatrous.” official * estimates anid’ 20 hod i ee aa eee Mente 
ater Koad, lel. 


YOU MUST BUILD UP YOUR which have made Malaya thelr 

RESERVES OF ENERGY. AS homeland ond centre of their 
loyalty. S 

A SUPPLEMENT 10 YOUR PIE, He pald tribute to the Gover- 


HORLICKS v : ne ‘col ace 
Wilt GIVE YOU THE fap nor General, Mr, Ma‘colm Mac 


‘ Ceylon’s Status died. Five’ hundred — were|, 
Ss Fe daeabin Mr. Mr, Stanley Oliver, Conser-} seriously wounded and several 
Grown Jones said that Britain's | vative, and + former Colonial) ‘hundred slightly injured: 
1 ject wean to transform the de- Secretary, sald that when Mr. In nddition to nitrates the 
ht ‘ies of the colonial Em: Creech Jencs made his an-| ship carried furs and motorcars. 
rire a : feaponaibility to exer- nouncement about Ceylon a few! Crates of furs and crates of 
ae reendehip and give what | weeks ago, he (Stanley) had} Packard cars could be seen 
wrnetient aid she could, in achiey- | het found it easy to understand} scattered slong the quayside, 
H the sockal happiness and | What was meant by the an-)and in the streets today. 
vall being of the colonial peo- nouncement, because in, that] The captain of the ship, 
ple ‘nnd : t the same time, to announcement, the © term] Hervein-Holzt, wns killed on a 
a Renta make their contri-| Dominion Status was never amall vessel patrolling around 
bation to the largey tfe of used. . . | the Ocean Liberty while she waa 
kind Stself ot It had, however, been used by being tugged out‘to sen in an 
pa ie ‘ attempt to stave off the disaster, 


Kowloon Office:  ~ Tel. $6260 


Donald, to Sty’ Edward Gent, 
eucneed eaerae ond give EXTRA NOURISHMENT the Governor of Malayn, to Sir 


chonces. YOU NEED. Sp Harold MneMichael, one of the 
ploneers of 1 new Malay con. 
rlitution, for the services they 
hac rendered in bringing about 
this happy result, ‘ 
“At the samo time, we would 
like to express Oty deep appre- 
‘alation of the apirit brought to 


WHAT MORLICKS 18 


Morlicks la made from pure full- 
cream cows’ milk plue the nutrie 
tivo oxtracts of malted barley aod 


wheat, [1 laa complete faod cons : ve ; 
iving foods ji . helpe to get ¢hingt munities,” he added. : intory i 7 
‘ Giving foods in proportions neces 8: gente met eine ed a phase of colonial history) going to be altered before 


in which there is a widespread 
demand from the colonial peo- 
plea or, al any rate. from the 
voen! clementa of them, for a 
more practical evidence of the 
sincerity of our oft proclaim- 
ed policy of conferring nelf- 
nuguration of the new conati-| government” on the colonial 
tution, the Government of the} communities, 

Federation or of “Singapore “Tam convinced that, in this 
wished to press that Singapore} modern age with its forces of 
Join the Federation, it would be} nationalism and freedom, with 


done. Singapore would also bave- nh 
are new constitution whieh would 
come inte operation either at 
the beginning of the year, but 
not jater than the first of April. 


Singapore’s Position 


If, at any time after the in- 


ary for normal nutrition. Horlicks 
is 100% nourlahment, 


ever being put Into effect, defence 
and forelyn relations were to be 
dealt with by legislation, Now 
he presymed they would be 
dealt with by’ treaty. 

Had any progress been made 
in the trenty negotintions with’ 
the present Ceylon Ministers? 

Dr. Haden Guest, Labour, 
spoke of his recent visit to 
Malaya. He congratulated the 
Colonial Secretary on the vigour 


had to be calculated) according 
to the black market price of rice. 

Other polnta ha made were 
that: public health services in 
SIngnpére were ‘very difficlent. 
In Singapore and Kuala Lum- 
pur, housing was “shocking and 
abominable”. A ‘good many 
people were sleeping out of 
doors when he was Iqst there. 

Dr. Haden Guest sald that to 


y Horlicke can be ob- 
+s tained ‘ot all goed 
A Abn b Gleponsaries and pro- 
(ae wislon stores » tcke 
RY 


home a bottle today. 


Take ; 
HORLIGKS our tncrey 


W. S. Wholly free to do so and to re-| economic changes and the 
; : s SHERLY & CO., Kayamally Bldg. quest formal consideration of | sprend of education and politi-| of the new movement started in| improve the constitutional status 
. the subject. cal and social awakening, that lthe Far East, but doubted the|in Malaya, and other parts of 
wisdom of sending to the|the colonia! Empire without 


Jt was a matter for yettle-| we must ndjust’ ourselves to a 
nent between’ the peoples of | much quicker tempo of conatitu- 
: Malaya and Singapore. No de-| tional development than would 

; : cision could be taken without} have scemed practical a few 
IMPORTANT ANNOUNCEMENT the consent of both legislatures. | yeara ago. ae 

pe EAL Ss * In Sarawak, the administra-|" “We hive to experiment bold- 

: : : tion was steadily winning the|ly, though not necessarily rash- 

: : cordance of - ate aa on ly, ane recoen ee that while a 

was giving attention ea transfer of power to a people 

COMMENCING Ist AUGUST nd education problems. Steps] not fully trained or with inade- 

5 pai were now being taken to asso- | quate experience or tradition to 

ciate the people more closely.| exercise it will lead to mistakes 


drastically improving the econo- 
mic conditiong would ‘be a very 
sorry pretence. | He urged the 
calling of .a ‘great colonia} con- 
ference in London. 


Shop Windows 


Mr, Rees Williams, Labour, 
who visited Malaya as a mem- 
ber of the Parliamentary 
Mission, sald that the colontal 
territories were now as much 


colonics trade union advisers 
trained in the traditions of 
Great Britain, who had no know- 
ledge of the language, psycho- 
logy of the workers, or their 
problems. 

To send such men to Malnya 
or Hong Kong, for Instance, 
was to place them under a very 
great handicap. He suggested 
that selected candidates from 
the colonies should be sent to 


[LUXURIOUS “SKYMASTER” FOUR-ENGINED PLANES 


HONGKONG-LONDO 
" yIA ANSTERDAM _ 


. 


— HOURS OF OPENING — with the Government ond new] being made, it ‘is only through 
| toval ;Cpeocumant, institutions | actual experience In the exer- Be eaaetlen trained In trade pet im enatary iad feces 
= were being created, cise of responsibility that a ier to Ise thei 
Of the undermentioned DAIRY FARM uty tat | “Very Expensive? — | ic realise thelr value to British 


vt : ; - 3 ; . 1 He said the administration in 


, BUTCHERY & PROVISION the Far Enat bea good but 
: very expensive. e@ wonderes 
DEPARTMENTS will be as follows: nyt run ecentary have 


The food position in Malaya 
was serious and. would give rise 
to trouble if the supply of rice 


BOOKINGS ACCEPTED FOR ANY EUROPEAN DESTINATIO: 

was not dealt with very quickly. . NO PRIORITIES REQUIRED - ° 
The ration of rice In Malaya EXPECTED DEPARTURES FROM HONGKONG: 

was one-third of the ratlon in zy - + Oth August 


. 


why sit was necessary to have 
so many Governors in the area 
: 7 7 : : se j : of Malaya and Singapore. Why 
Main Depot (Lower Albert Road), Kowloon Branch «(Nathan ‘ Se elie dian ohe Governor ee ae NG er a ee Baan ee Ny eo ee 
General with - .aubordinate| Mr, Rees Williams asked what ‘For Passage & Freight bookings Apply to-— 


Road) and East Point B f ; { 
eee Te aie Peas a ; ’ officials? eee was being done about developing j : 
: : 30 A.M. to 12.30 P.M. and : Dr. Haden Guest said’ that] coal production in Sarawak and WwW ALLEM & Cc ° 


A 


something like half of the! the west-ollficlds there. He 


apo 2.00 P.M. to 5.00 P.M. daily. Aslatic ' worker : ; 
; 3 at Singapore] suggested: that Hon : ; Agents: , 
Saturday. : 430 ALM. to 1.00 P.M. only. LUMITED iad A br cotain from ae Singapors should. be aenicnel Hongkong é& Shanghal Bank Building. opto ey 
; : . : I culosia following the war, Con. h j i 8 FAT & ° 
Sundays & Holidays, - 9.00 A.M. to 11.00 A.M, only. ARE OPERATING FREQUENT FLIGHTS - aitlons for th eth were very bad, semeornay Mrie abe iors ot of ee 
' ceause food was deficient and|the Far East could be shown er 
HONGKONG -— SINGAPORE the cost of it very high. what Britain had to offer both| "™* " fais 


PEAK BRANCH opens from He said that he found’ *the| in material goods and in spiritual 


Direct In 7 Hours wagea of the hative labourers! development—Reufer. 


f * 8.30 A.M. to 12.30 P.M. and | ; } te ue ; 
: 2,00 P.M. to §.00 P.M. dally, . aA wry Beefs. : , 
Y gs ; : 4-ENGINED LANCASTRIAN AIRCRAFT . : 
Saturday, . 8,30 A.M. to: 1.00 P.M, only 7 2 : ee ne ty i 
Sundays & Holldays. 9.00 A.M. to 11.00 A.M. only. FARE HK$880. oe November Date For 
— Royal Wedding 


China Natianél 


+ Aviation Corp. 


7 . 
rs 


ec - §PECIAL EXCESS BAGGAGE & FREIGHT RATES 
WINDSOR HOUSE opens from , : 
NEXT DEPARTURES: Ps 


ra 8.20 A.M. to 6.00 P.M. dally. ¢ ; - London, July 29. 
| Saturday: 4.20 AM. to 1.30 P.M, only. | é 2nd August : Pines Elizabeth and Lieutenant Philip Mount- 
> cxf : i : tten. will be married estminste: bey 
Re ay Dee oer ee 6th August : . on November 18, the United Press was kaloren ; 


. a & 


CONCURRENTLY AS FROMJst AUGUST 
«| A DELIVERY SERVICE WILL BE 


ed today by excellent Palace sources. : 
There will be no official announcement of the date 


_ Detalls and Bookings from : “until after the meeting of the Privy Counell 
Z ie, : : ; \ , y Council on’ 
_J ARDINE MATHESON & CO., LTD: Ate? Friday. but. November 18 has been suggested - 


“% George himself and there is no reason . 


COMMENCED FOR THE BENEFIT OF aay ae pane 
; A YS DEPT, eet, 3 il wi is 
. + | “OUR KOWLOON .CUSTOMERS ae at = ies Aas eee Goa Coes Se Council weil, confinm 2big 
a : g nS Tel. 80812. - = : ‘i ; ‘wishes in the matter. 
. % Pew an Ce ve 4 Ga ae tie oink: an rot there never has’ been ‘a 
And. The Usual ties a ST the ‘wedding | month because and the eS ol tia idea. 


THE DAIRY FARM, ICE &. COLD. ae Sak ace he Tt ae op London's weather.’ then. f9|' Another suggestion fora 
a meme | USUOTY, Ill and Would enbance | Saturday ceremony as tho Jeast 


STORAGE. COMPANY, LTD. at ————+ ~ —. the ehanees of the big outdoor roduction also was 
_ : ees : ee eae * | celebrations, such aa . firewor! seatded.: vy of. 
vi" PURE Fe ‘00D . SPECIALISTS ee ee ; -.Tho Royal Family” will stey‘at 


FAR EAST FLYING TRAINING SCHOOL ‘LTD: displays certain to mark the, 

ore ee ee Oe tte gat eae Oh oo, POMGR ES aoe ry. "| Balmoral until the boginning of | ©. 
ance Bean: fe Fly in Your Own, Time “l Howdéver, those: in charge ‘ef | October and then will roturn/to] 

, ede ; arrangements feel thoy need ane London, whoro the Princess will 


" Ae eee “| Gther® month for the comfort- | start an Intensive sorles of fit- 


eae ie et HENRY’S. CAFE: : as es Du aeery progr ; a me aby opelval ot delegations from ee es Unit- 
Rone : : ‘ : and. for: the .compl{cated “plan a me 


© (Formerly. tha famous “Allied: nfo” ‘tw’ Karachi, India) |.” eB me ‘|ning. that oes. into, an, ata APPEAL LODGED: 
{ ; : seca Arm : we SE this - magnitude, 0)", : 
So Stieminighan,: July” 29. 
bO-year-old. native ‘of. 


Top. Floo 


Telephone: «1 


GIL 


Poge 8 


: Wartime. Device Has 
_ -Peacetime Value 


Even when King, Haakon of trial purposes requiring rapid ‘ 


Norway travels by read, he can 
remain in telephonic communica. 
tion with his Ministers, for he has 
had his cnr fitted with a railo. 
telephone system. From the 
varlous makes available, o British 
firm was selected as supplicr and 
instructed as well to fit Nor. 
wegian police cars with thls radio. 
telephony. This system maken It 
possible to link a considerable 
number of mobile units with cach 
other os well os with a fxed-cen. 
tral point, The |same system {ts 
in use too, for instance, In British 
ports to keep steam, tugs In tn. 
broken. communtgation with thelr 
“operations room” and with cach 
other, This system was origina. 
ly constructed in World War II 
to keep tanks In) communteation 
with their command or alreraft 
with thelr land = bases. = The 
munufacturers were convinced 
that their war-time device would 
alro be of service dn pencetlme 
and to that end continued with 
their designs, ‘The next 20 years 
ure expected to revenl the ddop. 
tlon of radlolelephony not. only 
fur shipping, but for other indur. 


ory 


" Transf 


interchange of communication. 


¢** @ 


Once of the tending engincers in 
American — neronautic clreles, 
Mr. Phillip Toylor, has visited a 
number of American, British and 
other European oireraft’ factories 
In order to judg for himself the 
various countries’ productive ¢M- 
ciency. He has declared” that 
Britain fs three to four years in 
ndvance of the United States as 
regards, the construction of jct. 
propelled nircraft and has. added, 
“The British are at this time 
‘conctntrating thelr full resources 
und efforts on the development 
of new alrcraft....which will be 
superlor to any present U.S, 
type.” In less than three yenrs, 
Britnin will be putting jet. 
propelled passenge® liners on the 
market with which no American 
machines will be able to 
compete, Air travel with these 
machines will be cheaper than at 
present, and faster since thelr 
speed will be 500 mph. and 
there will be no nolse nor vibra- 
tlon, 


oh Safire 


ormer 
er 
hs 


ME 
LM 


“errant 


Telephone 


MAN & COMPANY LTD. 


ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT 


31146 


BRING me ue 


ig of 


_. INTO YouR 


Ac 


“twiltlahe creeps along Into night... 
and you satile down . .”. 


* 


“A few weeks. ago. mention 
was made on this page of the 
proposed formation of the En- 
gineering Society .of Hong 
Kong. Although the hot weather 
har somewhat delayed organisa- 
elon work, it is proceeding and 
it is hoped very shortly to call 
a small meeting of represento- 
tive loval engineers for the pur- 
pore of drawing up a draft con- 
alitution for submission to a 
wider meeting to be called later 
in the year. 

While it is not intended 
slavishly to follow the constitu- 
tian of the Engincering 
Society of China, it Ss 
thought that a, conatitution 
of this sort might usefully 
form a basis for discussion in 
drawing up the constitution of 
the new association, So far, it 
las not been possible to obtain 
from Shanghal a copy, of the 
bye-lawsa of the Engineering 
Society of Chinn and if any 
reader of this column has a 
copy In his possession, it will be 
appreciated if it could be loaned 
for the purpose of making a 
copy. If a copy ja available, 
kindty send it to the Editor of 
the Engincering page of the 
China Mail, 

The iden of the Engineering 
Soclety of Hong Kong 
had its inception in the series 
of talks on Engineering  aub- 
dects corganised by Mr. John 
Finnie In Stanley Camp 
which’ were carried on bi- 
weekly with hardly a break for 
some 3 years, | ' 

The wealth of local engineer- 
ing talent and the number of 
able speakers on engineering 
subjteeta — disclosed by these 
tulks, led the sponsors to be- 
lieve that, not only. would a uac- 
ful purpose ‘be served by the 
formation of an Engincering 
Socicty, but that 4& would be 
possible to get. enough local 
speakers on engineering sub- 
jects to maintain a permanent 
and lively interest in ongineer- 
ing subjects. 

Primary Purpose | 

The old Institution of En- 
sineers and Ship-Buildera at 
one time made a regular feature 
of the presentation of papers 
on engineering subjects, but of 
latter years, this side of ita 
activities was somewhat negiect- 
ed and the institution became 
largely a social club and Ubrary. 

_ it is hoped that the new So- 
ciety, by concentrating its acti- 
vities on the presentation of 
payers of general und tocal en- 
xinecriny interest, will. be able 
to keep this primary purpose in 
view. On the ather ‘hand, the 
suggestion made previously in 


LO? 


relax wlth the 
pees . 


t 


ENGINEERING 
Plans Going Ahead For 


‘Engineer 


this page that teams of local 
engineers should collaborate In 
carrying out research Into local 
problems will by no means be 
negletted, It is alao hoped that 
close touch may be maintained 
with the engincering side of 
the Hong Kong University aos 
well as with the Hong Kong 
Technical College, and that by 


beset 


ser 


ve 


grave defects both of which will 
have to climinated before ‘sub- 
stantial progress can be made 
in the adaptation of atomic 
energy to peaceful purposes. 
Firstly, although trempndous 
amounts of heat energy aro pro- 
duced under controlled atomic 
fission, thia cnergy is of a low 
}grade, that is, at a low’ tem- 


By A Special » 


Correspondent | 


enrolling students at these in- 
stitutions as.student members, 
Interest {n the new society may 
be maintined at all levels. 
.e e .. 

_ Atomic Power:—- Many pro- 
blema, some .of them at first 
sight almost insuperable, will 
have to be solved before atomic 
powey can be put-to use os an 
effective substitute for other 
forms of energy, Man has 
learnt to release ntomic energy 
but xo fur has not entircly mas- 
tered its control and in this 
respect, the stage of develop- 
ment can be likened to that 
reached by our stone age an- 
vestors in the control of flre, At 
present, the production of 
atomic energy suffers from two 


It was no surprise to Mra. 
R. W. Roose, pretty young 
wife of a veteran, to look up 
from her jroning the other day 
and see a flock of reporters and 
photographers walk through 
her kitchen, . 

Mra. Roose is ‘used to such 
visita, She lives in a new hause 
which {8 attracting visitors 
from all parts of the United 
States and from-distant lands, 
because of its unique character. 

It is the warin-alr, research 
residence, first, experimentil 
houge in the Small-Home Re. 
acarch Center at the University 
o1 IWinois, Other _ research 
houses and a main building for 
laboratory, shops, and special 
facHlitics are planned for, later 
construction.in the Center. 


Realistic Tests 


Mrs. Roose lives in this house 
because the experts of thé smail 
Homes Council of the Univer- 


Experim 


7 
perature and unauitable for 
tranaformation into mechanical 
or electrical energy by any pre- 
sent. known technique. Second- 
ly, the by-products of atomic 
fission are highly radio-active 
and dangerous to life; thus it is 
only possible’ at present’ to 
operate atomic plants by re- 
mote control from behind im- 
mensely .. thick shields of con- 
crete, xteel and lead, 
Steam Raising 

Research “ia progressing to 
overcome these dafects and so 
far ax the first is concerned, it 
in now thought that a suitable 
production pant can be desizn- 
ed that will relerse the energy 
at a suficiently high tempera- 
ture to enable it to be used for 


readings of tho temperatures 
inside and outside the houses, 
for it is from such readings 
that the experts will draw im- 
,portant ‘conclusions about efl- 
clency ang cost of home heating. 
- Fortunately for him, he doesn't 
have to make the rounds of the 
240 thermocouples to find out 
the temperatures, In his clean, 
high-ceilinged’ basement there 
stands am central inatrument 
panel, not ‘far from Mrs. 
Roose’a washing muchine. Here 
the temperature ‘at ench of the 
240 points can be read by mere- 
ly flipping. the right  switeh. 
Four miles of wire connect the 
tiny instruments to the master 
panel, 7 
Many Readings ; 

There are other readings to 
be taken here—humidity, baro- 
metric pressure, draft, fuel and 

tricity used, and length of 


AGE 
‘Hong Kong 
g Society | 


| ents In. Heating 
_ And Cooling The Home 


ateam ‘raising and this steam, 
in turn, to be used in a conven- 
tional turbine, Estimates show 
that the cost per unit of elec 
trical energy would be some. 
what higher'than energy pro- 
duced by conventional methods 


but. at least, this promises that |, 


by the time natural sources of 
fuel such as coal and ofl begin 
to be exhausted, we shall be 
able to build atomic. power 
plants to take thelr place. The 
second difficulty, “according to 
latest reports, shows little signs 
ef being overcome and the 
necessity of huge ‘masses of 
shielding material . necessarily 
limit the application of atomic 
power to large statlonary units 
in the nature of super power- 
stations. Possibilities, however, 
ante the discovery of no method 
of releasing . atomic energy 
without the production of dan- 
serous radio-active by-products 
and secondly, the production of 
a new effective shielding 
materlal of greatly reduced 
bulk. i, a 

If ‘civilisation doen not des- 


‘troy Itself by the uncontrolled 


use of atomic power, we would 
appear to be the beginning of 
a cra where-in mankind will 
have at its disposal, 
Mfnlted, energy locked up i the 
atom and he will be rash indeed 
who would deny the possibility 
of tremendous developments in 
the next decade, 


. 


heating plant for a test of first. 
floor heating, 

Studies of panct heating will 
be made, To permit use of 
either floor or ceiling as heat- 
ing panels, both have been built 
on-.open-web stecl joists. Ex- 
terior panels of wails and ceil- 
ings are not nailed into place 

u 
changes in the heating system 
or in the wiring of reacarch 
devices, . : 


Modern Methods 


oe aA 
A number of new ideas. are 
being tried out in the basement, 
The chimney {s a 10-inch molded 
asbestos tile which looks like an 
ordinary pipe, A new type. of 
duct “is used for carrying ‘the 
‘hot atr. It is of uniform size 
throughout, permitting use of 
stundardized sizes in the take. 
offs, Thia is said to reduce cost. 
ade of, aluminum’ to get 
around the steel shortages, the 
ducts present a nent appearance. 
herever you go in the house 
you are likely to sec innova- 
tion. For this house. is a pilot 
ee pe Mes: Raose cooks 
a dinner or doca an tronin ‘ 
ie the satisfacti pate 


judge by her smile and patience 


in showlng the house, sho en. 
Joys 


the un-], 


screwed in, to facilitate | ° 


COVENTRY GAUGE & TOOL ¢0,, LTD. 


’ ‘PACKARD BELL - 

PHONOCORDS -; : 

‘PROVIDE ADDITIONAL ENTERTAINMENT 
, : to o 

Ordinary Radio Broadcast . 

. . by ve a 


Combining ‘The Following Exclusive 
Features In One Compact Unit 


, 


1 


Nome Recording on Blank Records. 

Rndilo Programs. Recorded on Blank Records. 
Microphono for Public Address. 

Radlo Gramophone. fms : 
All-Wavoe Radio Recelver 10 Tubo. 7 
Each Feature interchangeable by merely 


pressing a button. . 


SEE AND HEAR THE WEST'S BEST SELLING RADIO 
; AT 
‘ WAH.MEI. ELECTRIO COMPANY . 
-« TOMIN RADIO & ENGINEERING CO. 
WING ON COMPANY 
SUNLIGHT ELECTRIC COMPANY 
THE SINCERE CO., LTD. 


+ AGENTS: 
GETZ BROS. & CO., INC. 


Exchange Building Hongkong. 
7 


; GAUGES, 

pe * ‘AND. 
MEASURING INSTRUMENTS. | 

JIGS, FIXTURES, PRESS TOOLS, 


MOULDS AND CUTTING TOOLS. * 


Fletchamstead Coventry, England, 


Manufacturers’ Representative: s ‘ 
FAR. EAST IMPORT & EXPORT: LTD, 


127, WK. & Shanghal Bank Bldg. + "Wet, 32509, 


TENET EIT 


her responsibility. 


ce an eae ed 


| Your D.C. Lifts! 


“finest radio” entertainment, ‘caplared for 
you by the magic of PINILIPS Radio 
Corsptetely "new PHILIPS Radloplayers 
are how on display at your PHILIPS 
dealer,’ They offer you "new and better 


radio reception, are housed in smertiy 


styled and durable modern cabinets, hnd 
designed spectaily for thie country. Visit 
_your PHILIPS dealer and ose and heae, ; 
the new Radloplayers. . ‘ ; ae ee : a a 7 
- .Use.a HEWITTIC Mercury ‘Arc Rectifier Unit 
toe | and contiiue ts work éfficienlly on AC.’ 
: Folge ell nO the Gnesi ge . aa oe vito : : : 
o, ly Radloptayard to bear the + ie enh. genet 
.; PRLsre cane, Connections lot gramme: ee, oi “ h ie From L-to. 10,0 
ee and extid speaker, 7. calves, an earn a ; ; eee 
wave caager, with sutra R 6 Cy ‘ i for all: purposi 


» £390 ANALN .,. Finows table moder 
tecelver (a the now Pruure range, 
con the exclusive new FID 

INTROL. 9 calves, & ware rangeds. 
1 Modera wood eobing, es) 


at he 
a}. 


f alr’ which Pare 
acne oh oe 
hese especially usefu: 
te eek hostels, | ete. a. mu 
aro-vory- sturdy, and thelr sim 
glty of dealgn makes: them pave nike 
clean, aswell os: givi : 
rare at giving o biigatae : 


6 80 : 
‘solar’ heating:It' 
nt-f0ot basements dor alga 
ty. forr bhudy 


| Cs. Lid. 


.° WATER TREATMENT 
; PLANT. 


Sale Agents: 


THE JARDINE ENGINEERING 
| CORPORATION: LTD. 


ete. 


WITH SPRING MATTRESSES 
Sizes : 6° 3" x 3° 0” 
( " we x 2° Gg”. 
ORDER BARLY WHILE STOCKS ARE HERE 


RELIANCE TRA 


“David House, 


DING. CO., LTD. 


SELFRIDGE'S BRITISH-MADE STEEL BEDS 


At reasonable prices 


Tel. 25240 


APB 


— 


Paterson Engineering , 


‘ 


The majority of water sup- 
plies are unsuitable, in thelr 
natural condition, for drinking 
purposes, and requfre some 
form of «treatment, To deal 
effeclvely with raw water, and 
make It fit for human con. 
sumptlen, the Paterson  En- 
gineering Company, of Kings. 
way, London, developed a form 
of filtration known na the 
Paterson raptd filter, which, can 
deal with a greater yolume of 
water than the old methods of 
slow filtration, 

All particles’ tn water are 
kept in suspension by electrical 
charges, which repel them from 
one another, Aa the particles 
may be loo minute to be Inter- 
ecpted by an ordinary filter 
syntem, they have first to be 
grouped together In a flocculent 
condition, = The coagulating re.’ 
agent used dy usually aluminium 


> ATT opie i eq + Perpntee sulphate, which neutraliges the 
3 MiG PEDDER STREKT, HONG KONG. electrical charges so that: the 
TELEPHONE $0311 pardcles group together, making 
rg ee ; them capable of being removed 
: cither by sedimentation or — by 
ee, ef i trator, : 
t 
aoe = EE IEEE AST FER PIE SSETOPT se .8 
ewly Arrive Tools’ 
' Very suilable for Schools, Institutions, 00 S 


Combine 


. British Engineers’ Small Tools 
& Equipment Co, Ltd, (BESTEC) 
ik an overseas selling organisa. 
tlon set up by the leading British 
manufacturers of precision en. 
dineering = cquipment, BESTEC 
offers to customers throughout 
the world a wide range of Bri. 
lish engineering products of the 
highest quality, and this quality, 
will be maintained as additional 
products are added to the range. 
Six engineering tools manufac. 
turers belong to the BESTEC or. 
gunisntion, They are: 


Brooke ‘fou| Manufacturing Co. 
Ltd, 

+A. A. Jones & Shipman, Ltd, 

F, Pratt & Co. Ltd. , 

Coventry Gauge & Tool Co. Lid. 

Taylor, Taylor & Hobson, Ltd, 

E, R. Watts & Son, Ltd. 

SeVeral other leading British 
engineering firms are shortly to 
Join this Hst.. 

BESTEC permits overseas cus. 
tomers to, buy all the products of 
these companics tHrough a single 
source, thus saving time, money 
and indecision.: Belwcen them, 
these companies, nnd the others 
yet to be included, provide a com. 
picte range of precision equipment, 
required for » modern engineering 
workshop, stich as cutting tools, 
gitttges, measuring — inscuments, 
optleal equipment, workshop 
etatupinent, efe. The range is con. 


_ENGINEERIN 


Oo 
me 


‘Frequently lime, chalk or 
sodium aluminate ty added , to 
balande the hydingen-ton- con. 
centration “(pH valuc) of the’ 
water, and this enables a very 
smal) doze of coagulant to be 
used.” If the raw water Is de- 
ficient in hardness. the clarified 
water may be slightly acid, and’ 
Uable to absorb leads from the 
pipes through which it passcs. 


Nesttraliser 

This acidity ia neutrallsed by 
the addition of on alkall, such 
ag Mme or chalk, The. reagent 
feeding apparntun should) res. 
pand readily to the {fluctuations 
In the flow of water, as it ta 
important that the reagent used 
should be In proportion to the 
volume of water, 

Two other chemical methods 
of purification used are the 
lime-soda . process ‘of water 
softening, and the use of chlorine 
for the destruction of pathogenle 
bacteria in water for drinking 
supply, swimming baths, sew. 
age, etc, ‘ . 

The process of sedimentation 
helps to remove a voluminous’ 
precipitnte formed by addition 
of the rengent, lenving only the 
normal reatdue to be removed 
hy fitration. The removal of 
the precipitate is brought about 


iby the Introduction of the water 


Into specially designed sedimen- 
tary tanks, In which the process 
of precipitation is) mechanically 
assisted, and means of disposing i 
of the precipitated Impurities 
provided, The Paterson En. 
Rinceriny Co, Ltd. haa designed 
varloux forms of sedimentation 
tanks for une under various 
conditona, ‘nnd for dealing: with 
different classes of water, 


“Slow Sand” 

After tly$ suapended content 
of the water has been reduced 
to normal proportions, the water 
Ik passed through filters of 
sultuble design, to effect the 
finn? chirificatjon, The usual 
method used for filtering is. the 


“PHE CHINA MAIL, THURSDAY, JULY 91,1047, 


Continued 


. 


“alow, sami system, developed 
by James Simpson’ in 1829, and 
at one time in..common ‘use in 
Great Britain, -as well as on the 
Continent, | Thin’ method con- 
sists of n bed of sind supported 
by layers of graye), provided 
with drains at. floor level to 
permit an ountform rate of per- 
colation, In time the sand be- 
comes cotered «with a film of 
Iving and dead organisms, and 
this "covering retaina -the sus- 
pended matter, while. further 
changer In the chemleal con. 
ditlon of the water ure effected 
by ,bucteria and other = micro- 
organisma oon and | below the 
filter ‘eurface.’ The main dis- 
advantages; of this system are 
the alowness of operation, and 
the great area required to deal 
effectlvely with any — large 
valume of water, 


To combat these defecty the 


rapld or mechrnical filter was |. 


developed, purifying the’ avater 
by means of artificial filtering 
films, and using oan efficient 
method of cleaning the filtering 
without removal, thus apeedingy 
up the entire procers, and. re- 
quiring’ less apace fog operation, 

It! of great importance that 
the filter, whatever its type, be 
capable of rapld and efficient 
clennsing, If the cleansing ar. 
fangements are inadequate, the 
plant becomes inefficient, and 
the quality of the filtered water 
deteriorates, 


Bowen Road 

The slow sand filter system 
was formerly used in Hong 
Kong, but it was discovered that 
this systeni was not capable of 
dealing efficiently with the sus- 
pended content of the’ water, 
especially during the rainy sca- 
son, and a rapid gravity filter 
system was Installed, 

The Bowen Road filters, where 
the water derived from a catch- 
ment area of 3,000 acres, mont. 
ly hill slopes covered with 
vegetation, collected the water 
in four storage reservoirs with 


‘Smoke Detection By 


Photo 


A photo-cell smoke detecting 
cauipment has been desined -by | 
‘The General E'ectri¢, Co. .Ltd., 
af England in conjunction with 
the , Admiralty primarily for 
marine use with ofl fired boilers, 
Tts purpose js to give the boi'er 


attendant immediate » warning 
at a smoky condition in the up- 
take, and so make possible 


maximum efficiency of combug- 
tion, with a consequent economy 
in the consumption of fuel oil. 

The equipment has already 
been fastalled on the ai tty 


Cell 


mirrors are mounted on the up- 
tuke ua close us possible to the 
hoer, and are protévted by re- 
movnble armour plate glasses 
which prevent thelr oiling-up 
under working — conditions, 
These glasses are fitted in slid- 


-ing ‘earricrs and are. easly re- | 


movable fot cleaning. “They 
are replaced by clean glasses, 
which are held in’ reserve, at 


least every 12 hours as part of 
the regular routine duty of the 
boiler room staff, 


Where the equipment is in- 


7 foi ‘Page | Eight | 
The Rapid. Filter System Of 


_ Water Purification 


.creation of a “Slav bloc”, and 


Unucusly being reviewed and in. 
ercased, ‘ghving buyers the chance 
to keep up to date with modern 
niethods of production. 

BESTEC also has obtained the 
services of the strongest agents 
in each territory, agents who have 
the fucilitles for giving custém. 
ers the {echnleal service so es. 
sential for high quality products, 
and who can deal most offective. 

‘ly with the wide range of pro- 
ducts offered. The agent will, In 
effect, be the. sole distributing 
representative’ of the manufac. 
durers. who are members of 
BESTEC. The BESTEC organisa. 
tlon Is not intended to swamp 
“ut the individual manufacturers, 
or thelr contacts with their cus. 
tomers, It co-ordinates Its mem. 
bers’ ectivites, ond also greatly 
simplifies buying for both agents 
aid customers, who can now 
place all their orders with one 
central source, 

-Each territory Js covered separ. 
ately by, BESTEC representatives, 
Directors and executives of 

-| BESTEC also make regulor visits 

Ee to customers and agents {n oll the 

: principal markets, one purpose 

of which {s to/deaign, ond ad. 

vise on, specin} equipment. to 
meet Tocal conditions ond pro. 
duction problems, |. |; 

“The BESTEC - representatives 

[in Hang Kong care' The For East 

Import and “Fxport Ltd’. 127 

Hong Kong. &. Shanghai, Bank |: 

Hunding, “Hong Kong. .' 


- VEELINK | 


THE LINK i wi 


‘4 
en. 
WHY PRODUCTION: GOES UP_ 
WHEN. VEELINK GOES ON 


' 


ee y : machine that: may 

F tlonlse ” bottle ‘manufacture has 
ALB ar been designed by! two ‘Scottish 'n.' 
1 Sie .., + =| ventors: + So cfar bottle-making 


has been successfully tested une 
der service conditions on both 
these vesuela and is obviously of 
prime importance to ships of 
the Merchant Navy, particu‘ur- 
ly’ those engaged on long voy- 
ages, when a very considerablo: 12 
saving in fuel can be realised. 


cell to smoke detection rendera 
Obsolete the former method. of 
gauging the conditions in the 
uptake by observing with 
naked cye a light beam ‘reficct- 
ed. in a mirror, 
tem it was not always ensy for 
the operator to detect ‘a changu 
In conditions promptly, and con- 
trol tended to be erratic. 
Photo-cell 
overcomes such difficulties, since 
the indicator 
operator {mmediate warning of 
any change in the conditions in 
the uptake, oven. before the 
smoke reaches the top of the 
funnel, and he can take prompt 
stops to adjust the alr and tual 
valves. In consequence of this 
immediate response, the funne! 
can. normally: -be: maintained |. 
clear Or with's slight’ haze. as 


‘may be-required, © ss: 
__ Glasses In Reserve 


sentially '.-a) projector :. ‘lamp 
house, roflecting mirrors, photo- 
cell nmplifler, indicating lampn 1 
and control box. :. A 12 volt 8G]: 


carrier HM.G.S. “Warrior” 
and on the Intest battleship 
H.M.S. “Vanguard” on’ which 
their Majesties travelled on 
their visit to South Africa. It! 


stalled in boiler rooms working 
under a pressureof alr, practi- 
cal experience on board Nae 
shown that [f the components 
are a'l mounted with a halt. 
inch sir gap between the is 


take and flagye mounting of the 
component, sufficient air passes 
in front of the armour plate 
glasses to keep them free from | 
| particles of oll over a period of 
12 hours. .If,. however, the 
boiler room. is‘not under air 
pressure, itis necessary to pro- 
site an independent air supply 
to the plasaes, ‘and suitable at- 
tachments are arranged on the 
aes for;coupling up to 
Af Se ey 


’ The application of the photo- 


the 


Control Box 

The .. cotitrol, box, . which is 
usually pla¢ed-in ‘the main en- 
gine control room, contains the 
constant vo:tage current trans- 
former and. calibrating. resis- 
tances. A 20 volt single’ phase 
operation; In the event of there 
being only b'D.C. supp'y avail- 
able, a-rotary ‘converter {a om- 
nloved to.’ give the ‘requisite 
ALG, te : 
There ‘are two . indicating 
lamp boxes for each uptake, one 
adjacent to the ‘alr and: ofl 


With this sys- 


The 
inatallation entirely 


Iamps. give the 


rudm, the other In the main en- 


‘sh{it engineer. can also sce at’ 
Ee ar aa ee ‘ & -planco thecondition ih the’ 
Tho cquipnient: comprises ‘cs 1 voraah ‘Eg 

t! 


sive. emdk 
watt.lamp provides the source | for 


ot’ light. whichis ‘projected 


sulate there-—Asso¢iated Press, 


valve  contro's--in the’ holler’)... 


size control room, so’ that, the: 


see tied . hos ‘been the task’ of skilled glass. 
> ALB 


Ulowerr,’who had to “watch with 
chro every stage’ of: the! process: |. 
The -néw. machino carries ‘out the, 


ot? a’. speed: ight bottles": ‘2 
rainite; ) beyorid - 
achievement: df .even- the ‘handiest 
‘| crottamans "The «firm. responsible: 


fo g" the. iriachine ‘already’ 


*whole- process: automatically" and |. 
the |< 


acroas the uptake and:ia raflect- 
ed. by a mirror through: 2} 
focussing Joné-on to the cathode 
of the :photo-cell.:,.. Tho* numb 
of mirrors may 

cord 


in he ‘nize of: the | 


 BENLOW’ | 
_  GOLMET 
: THE LIGHTER. THAT ~ | 

NEVER TAU 


a total capaelty of 2,000 milfion 
walions, During the rainy: sea- 
yon the water collected consider- 
‘able xediment, which choked the 
filtration system. It was decld- 
ed to install six Paterson filters, 
ench 24 ft. by’ 12 ft, together 
with, the necessary housing for 


fm 


OBTAINABLE IN 4 


GOLD AND OTHER 


the filter operating . platform epee ao 3 q 
the chement | trealnrent plant ATTRACTIVE COLORS 
and the ter . cleansing ‘ 

machinery. ' AT THE FOLLOWING 


» The plant, with « capacity of 
3 million gallons daily, has 
apprratua for mensuring and 
recording the quantity of water 
trented, and for the addition of 
the necessary aluminlum, sul- 
phate and lime, Final sterilisa- 
lion is ensured by n Chloronome, 

Paterson | filtration systems 
were also installed at the Eljlott 
filter atation, and the Shing: Mun 
Waterworks, scheme on the 
mainland. z 

The Paterson Engineering Co, 
Lul.. who are ati) developing | 
more officient means of water 
purification, are represchied in 
Horg Kong by the Jardine 
Engineering Corporation. 


Dimitrov 
Denies 
Intrigue 


Belgrade, July 29, 

Balgaria ts “absolutely oppos- 
ed to’ the division of the world 
inta two enemy camps," the 
Bulgarlan Premier, M. Georg! 
Dimitrov, who arrived in Zagreb 
ons short tour of Yugoslavia, 
told the Yugoslavian Govern. 
ment leaders yesterday. 


AUTHORIZED DEALERS: 


. ’ 

THE WING ON CO., LTN.—Drs Voonx Road. 
JHE SINCERE CO., LTD.—Dcs Vocux Road 
THE CHINA EMPOTIUM, ‘LTD.—Queen's Road 
THE SHUI HING COMPANY.—Des Vooux Roatt 
WHITEAWAY, LAIDLAW & CO. LTD.— Des! Vocux Md. 
TABAQUERIA FILIPINA—-22b Des Vocux Rd, 
WAI KEE JEWELLERY —Hongkong Hotel Bldg. 
THE DRAGON SEED CO.—37 Queen’s Rond 
THE DRAGON LIGHT CO.—37b Queen's Road 

- KEENSEN’ COMPANY-—-China Bldg. Queen's Rd. 
YEE HING COMPANY—62 Des: Voeux Road 
INDIA EMPORIUM—18A Queen's Rond . . 
CHEONG HING: STORE—S3 Nathan’ Road ‘ arn 
INDIAN BAZAAR—55 Nathan Road y : 


REVITALISE GLANDS’ 
REJUVENATE BODY 
eee 


THE BRITISH GLANDULAR PRODUCTS LTD., LONDON 
(The original Gland’ firm’ .:. established 1929) 


“We are absolutely opposed 
to any pollcy which would lead 
to new augyression and. a new 
war in the Balkans, in Europe 
and in the world,” he said, 


He was spenking at a luncheon 
given oat) othe = Presidium of 
fhe, Yuxoslav ,National . As- 
sembly, and the speech was re- 
leased for the public only today. | 


Dimitrov, who was formerly 
head of the Comintern » (Com- 
munist International), sald that 
the visit of the Bulgarian delega- 
tion was “of -much* greater im- 
port than.a mere visit of friend. 
ship.” : : 

The time had come, he said, 
to undertake “practical, concrete |- 
and efficacious congolldaticon of 
our brotherhood on the basis of 
close political and ceonomic and 
cuJtural cooperation. ‘ 

He denied allegations: of the 


The 


< | je 


pointed out that excellent rela- . ' ; sshd a 3 
tions existed with Rumania and TABLE OF RECOMMENDED PRODUCTS 
Albania, neither of whom were ‘ : : Pee 


Slav nattons,—Reuter, ee NAMES. - _ FOR MALE SEX. . 
: _ y t The fineat of all revitatising gland tohice for, the male vex. 
ae 31600 Con recartmended for at) rundown conditions, lose ef virlle tone 

« bottle. and premature ageing. Thia preparation’ rejuvenates the 
, Ps entire system and -imparte new vigour and ‘vitality. Invelus 
H. K AIR C : able for nervous traubles, neurauthenls, depression, fora of 
ones i“ tonidence, brain fag and overwork, high bloed pressure, 

. we ‘ ‘prostate dieordera ete, : Pot fg 
oe 2 An axtra powerful and effective. preparation fer use tn the 

SOUGHT ss $e) Ge Male sex, composed of Gland, Extracts, .vitaming. and - acti- 
bottle. vated mineral, compotinda, (twill, cestore manimas effteleney 


in stubborn and Jong standing conditions @f | physical In- 
aMictency. A harmises rational and, safe freatment which ba 
not a temporary stimulant but which produces permenantly 
oe beneficial reaults. - ' Hecane 
This cempound: Is made/lo a new formeala and ella nbke 
‘ roe 


Manila, July 30, 
Colonel Jesuy Villamor, Fills 
pino’ war ace, who is the diree- 
tor of the Philippine Bureau 
of Aeronautics, is scheduled to 
fly'to Hong Kong on Friday to 
discuss the terma.of a recipro- 
cal air agreement between the 
British Crown Colony and’ the 
PhUippines Republic, the De. 
partment .of'. Foreign « Affairs 

disclosed today, ‘ . viet 
He:.will be accompanied by 
representatives of the Forelgn 
Office whose mission is to form- 
ally establish a Phi'ippine Con- 


SP. i.P: BRAND 
TABLETS : 


$19.00 per 
bottle. - 


where m powerful. rezencrating “meditus (ndicated., 

tracted dosage restores normal functh and-promoted 
mum eMeleney throughout the entlre ‘nystem, Indicat 
Neurosis, senescence. Impotetce, vitamin inefficency - ete. 


A pedatlve compornd ‘for ‘urteontrotable overexcitablilty ‘of 


prostate: gland: dleerders, fasominia’ 
. -FOR FEMALE SEX. . , 

« qatablished (remedy for functional disorders ef the female 

ad toe . : oa 


OVERONES *" 
$10.00 per 
bottle. _ 


ae ‘Maderp medical 
ms beauty enliuce. 
7 


C 


BKIN ‘TONIC 


ed ‘firemen:: :spra: 


burning :furnituro 


bo‘incrensed no-|-ta 


ground. floor’ offices 
apoties tho’ fire bofo 
charice to j 


ty 


er 


7 ‘Tel: 


PAVESALENGK A" 


tor Dare 1 


Agents. 
Ship 


Sultable 


, 


SHIP 
“SCYNUILA" 


~ King's Bullding, Gonnaught Road, | 1 
Shipping Dept. 28016. Passage Dept. 28017. - 
Chinese Agenta, Connaught foad, C. No. 82, Tel. 25183. « 


M1th Augast 


sete nti id eee al 


js Suitable cargo, tanks for bulk oll | Bh Rlo de Jnanciro, 


, ‘Transhipment cargo on through Bill of Lading accepted 
Saluam, Mombnsa, “analbar, 


“ia “BDISSE VAIN’ In reconversionLonding Tor South Africa 


| suitabt cargo tanks for bulk oil ( 


“(DELLSTRAITS-CHINA LINE): 


“SWARTENHONDT® Singapore, 
Ant. August 


SILVER LINE LTD. 


due from 


pis, “SSILVE RSANDAL" Singapore, A i 
Mth August vin Singapore, Penang 


‘ “IRE, NDONEAL L u $. Auantle ports U.S 
mee ik Miatadtaa & 
Shanghai, 

on or about dist 


HNOLLAND-EAST ASIA LINE 


on, “HUGO de VRIES’ 
Europe 
Inte August 


cnutgo tanks for bulle 


: THE’ CRINA- MAIL, THURSDAY, JULY Bly 1047... 


Futu ré) 


L0n Gérmany’s 


2 ., Ldhdon, July 29... 
The Soviet. Govethment has accepted an invita- 


Ship: ‘ due from Sailing. for tion issued by Britajn to a cpptetene of For- 
ma, “KSISADANE” pan Shanghal * Singaporc, Java ports elgn Mintsters’ deputies, for ekmany to, theet: bi 
Sth Augiat y 30th August: rete Peed tea tober, a Forelgn ‘Oflice Ex chan nge. : sharpest. 
“Nit, Port, Amoy _& Shanghal, Spoxesmay 8 today. __ Only a malerate business was transacts 


The invitation was sent ‘simultaneously three 
weeks. ago to Washington, Moscow and. Paris. 


al. A few quotatlos showed alqna of a 


ith August pax, although soneratly: the market 


M. Ateamboate Ln: Indo Chinas (Href.) 

101n,. (Del,) 929n¢ Shella (Mearer) 101/ 

‘own: Union Waterboata (Ol) ad. 

(Now). 40% n. : tor, 
Docks, Wharves, Godewns, 

KK. Wharves 2é60 . 


Marques, Belra, Durban, ricun negotiations on the ccona- 


Youth Fealtval in Prague today, 
ee eee on the struggle of Chinese 
Capetown, Buenos Alres, Youth, Chen ‘Chia Kang, mem- 
Montevideo, Santos, her of the Presidlum of the 
Werld Federation of Democratic 
Youth, sthted that Chinese youth 
was completely united although 
China waa today . divided, Into 
two party — one governed by 
Chinng Kal Shek, and the other 
“Hberated.”” 

While youth In the Mberated 
territory in northern and north- 
eastern) Chinn could organise 
freely, youth in) Chinng Kal 
Shek's China gould meet only in 
seeret and was exposed to heavy 
persecutions, he sald, appealing 
to the democratic youth of the 
world to give Its . support to 
Chinese youth in ity fuat strug. 
xie for pence.——Reuter. 


mic future of the joint Zoner 
in Germany hos strengthened 
the impression that the attempt 
to reach a four-power agrec- 
ment on cconomic unity, for 
Germany, which eluded the For- 
elgn Ministers in Moscow and 
was passed to the. Aled qu- 
thorities in Berlin) for con. 
sideration, from 
achievement an ever. 

Soviet © accepfance . of = the 
October meeting of deputies is 
keen by diplomatic observers as. 
of more than routine signi- 
ficance, ‘since it providea in ad- 
vanee a positive nasurante that 
Moscow dees not. foresee any 
alteration of the arrangement 
by which work on the German 


th August. ; 
Doskrerde 16%b, 37a0, . 

Mining! Raub Mines Tay IK, Mines 
Geta. n, eer hi 

Landa, Het Didgar FH. & HH, Hotels | | 
XD, 20%b, 26a, 2040 /25en; HK. Land: 
(Old) R2s, Kean, (New) Min: Shanhr 
Landa 3%;  Humphreyd Fataten 25%b. 
i H.K. Reatties 166; Chincee Eatate 


South Amerlea August 


Is on , ‘far 


Public UUitiUess n K, Tramways 24h 
260, 2Yy/Nen: Peak Trama (Obl? 
10% b, (New) So: Star Ferrles tS3b: 

rics 81n; China Lights (Ol) 

» 18K /%/. 600m, (Naw) 18h, 

HK. Elvetricn  70%Qb, O%/ Yan: 
Electrica 226; Sa in, Lightaf caso 8 

13n; Telephones (Old) 47440, (New) | 
46Ma, 3Gen, 


Dry docking 
in Hong Kone. 


Sailing for 
U.S, Atlantic ports 


(X. Rey 32% 0, 324yam, (Right) wher 
INK, Hopes 220. 

Stores @e.t Dalry Farms 80n; Watnan 
O8t4a; Lane, Crawfo 6OKb, 50 
'Minerrea Ob: China Emporium «14 ie 
Converted; Bun Ca, .Ltde 64%bs Kwon 
Sony Hong 220n; Wing. On (HLK.) XD. 
l48n; Wm, Powell, Lid, OYh 


- nnd Colombo, 
end of August, 


Atlantte no 4 
via Philippines, Stralts 
and Cotambo, 

early September. 


The British invitation reca!l- 


ed that three questions which 


were entrusted to the deputies 


Chinese Trade. 
With Japan 


Sor study by 


their Foreign 
Miniatera = in 


Moscow were 
procedure for preparation of 
the German peace 


Miscellaneoas: = China 
a6b; MLK.  Constrictlune (Ol) THe} 45%, 
(Now) Gn: Vibro Pillng. 64n; Marmen 
Investimenta 8/ani Maruman LK) 1/6n. 


Entertainments 


treaty, the 


Agents Nanking, July: 30. | political atructure of Germany mr Know Hs 
an, “BEASMUS” Mantle /Slagapore / Sala / The Executive Yuan — has ae end compensation for United 
. ‘0 3 Jected the National Economie} Nationa interests In Germany. vdnii 
ie eat laa en | Counell’s recommendation © to] Tt was alse recalled that: the ri ain Shot how Real st 


Amsterdam /{famburg / 
Copenhagen /Gothens - 
burg / Oslo, 
enrly Sept. 


exe.Japonese trade and decided to reports from the Allied Contro! 
send a private Chinese trade mis-! authorities jn Berlin on a num. 
sion to Japan, a reliable source] bor gf economic questions. Jt 
told the United Press today. was not yet clear whether these 

The Executive Yuan's decision reports would be submitted to 


. London, July 380. 
Britain can and should. grow 
all the food she needs. on the 


Mantia /Singapore/ 
Colombo ‘Suez/Port Sald/ 


Genoa /Mareilles / will be submitted to the State! the October conference of the de-| 32,000,000 acres, of , farmland] | 
Antwerp; Rotterdam/ Councll on Friday for confirma-} nuties or whether, as in the case which this faland contains, two PB 
Amatredany dso bur ey ° Mons rhs bi abe ga aa of the Moscow session. of the mombers of, the British Soil 5 
openhagen/Gothen- rived a ne aecis: on after Cabine' : Assoc! at on. sald T eada: . 
all burg ‘Osto, members came round to the view Council of Foreign Ministers on fu y. 


Whatils needed“is to put 500, 


they would be he'd over for pre- |. 
000 more workers on tho land 


~—lend September. Unt"“China’s foreign policy cun-| sentation direct to the Forelgn 


ee 


Peninsula & Oriental SN. Co. hams 


nn ae a ts rt es oe 


se leeseennannaaes veneer UK Colombo & 


not run counter to that of the 
, United States,” 
However, one high oMctal satd 


‘the reopening of Chinese-Japanese 


and to increase. soil fertility. by 
returning. garbage and other 
organic materials to the soll ,{n-! 
stead: of destroying them,, said | 
the writers, Dr. T, H.: Sander- 


Ministers themselves. 
These three queatlons were 
exhaustively discussed: by the | 
four Foreign Ministers theme! 
selvex in Moncow.—Reuter, 


commerce relations might’ be 


hamstrung by varlous difficulties 


Deputies Conference in. London 


countries.— 


settlement will continue in Lon- 
don. at the Foreign Ministers 
meeting in November 

between’ the — two Pe: 


postpone the reopening, of : Moscow Conference . demanded 


“STRATHNAVER" 
(Passengers ouby) 


— 


SHIP 


é ““NANKKIN" saatliasarie 
: «NELLORE 


* Aceepts cargo for Landon,: ‘antirerp & Rotterdam, 
aceepts cargo for Madras on through bills 


Eastern & Australian. S. $. Co., Ltd 


ARRIVALS : 


‘EMPIRE ATHELSTAN® ssseneelfelbourne & 


iveovmenoe (Anata & 


For ‘full’ partletilars apply te 


_macaision MACKENZIE & co. 
Soot iil age 2721.4. ; 


‘i io HOwG STEMISHP co. (1932 ) itt | 


. os as, “HONG: STANG” 


The government. opposed the 
amendment os “quile. impossible” 
-| maintaining that, it. would, make 
‘}4t {mpossible to evaluate. installa. 
tions and properties on stock ex. 
change valuations, ‘ 


--woBlingapore 
& 


and September 


_A BRITISH CROSS WORD. PUZZLE’ 


ce Fe 


_ 


of Inding. 


to the. whole eaten — 
—United ERE ns : 


___ Singapore - 


Balled “Over 
tons, , ror 
nment 

00 


2 doris 
DUE. eure of Penal 
Mid, August ‘Soptom nidier nnd ae : 


Sydnoy buying price 


End August 
ee jZeatand : Ea ee = : ter.the g 
Sydney ‘E Suva ; Eilaic comber $2.20; May icsdick ice 


Corn Bing ; 
bi wes. a lowdr, ; 


10 a.m, 


Ath, Anant. 


nb, PENANG & RANGOON: 


Sunes to Alteration Wialhout. Notice 


} Passage: and Frofght Particul 


- THE HO HONG ‘co. IGHINA) 


lars, App! 


edule alike SAE HAS ALS 
STi aiiet Say © 


Soviet Accepts Invitation 


N. Y. Stoc 
HK. Stock. ‘Market Down 


Among galnoes wore Herahey 
bgeolate, Koystona Stoel, 
- Dow. “Jones Averages: 
65,00; 20 Industrials 
Ralls: 49.45;.10 Utilities 35.59, 
dams Express , 
%, Amefican 
‘Amefican Smelting 61, American 
Telophone 157%, 
bacco 76%; American Waterworks 
190 16%) Anaconda Coppor 87, Avia- 
tlon’ Corp, 5%, Baldwin Locomo- 
thy 18%, Barnsdall 27%, Bonwix 
Aviatlon "a2, \Bothlehem | Steal 
884%, Booing. Ajrcxatt. 16, pean 
ee: 43, a a Pacific 12% 


Juneny 4 


‘SBh, Commercial 

Corn Products “86, Dupont 191, 

Industriales Canton fers 7441; Cemented Eastman Kodak 46, Electric Light 

‘& Power 

37%, General Motors 68% 

rich 63, Goodyear aey 
Homestako 


tional Tel 
‘Manville 43%, Kennecott Copper 

Montgomery Ward Gti, 
‘National Distillers 21%, National 
Lead 33% 


creased farm production abroad! industrials and oils were 
will make it impoasib!e, for Bri-| marked down whon fresh sel ing 


ness opened this morning, Around 
midday, howevor, the. selling gub- 
sided and somo 


closed, above, the lowest but wort 
genorally ‘down on balance, whits 
‘| some further sharp. decliney ov- 
curred among the leading: jndus- 

Oils ‘also 
ground although meeting with ‘a 
cheap 


The feature In. the commodity is 
section was.the renction to 17/- 
in... An; Bb Datel rubb : 
ely. plantat! had) 
mustained £2,000,000  damagens 


‘Netee To Constgtiees 


k 


New York, July 80. 


Stocks suffered ‘one of their 
rolapran 

feveral.,.manths .. and.) markat 
logdera showed losses 
mora, than threo points. Porslstent 


‘of tho poat 


of one to 


and the 


upewing 
arth 


1,100,000 


Sarria Oe hea aa: anelea. 
a8, OTIADAK™ Japan, Shanghat . Singapore, The Soviet ‘neeeptance wan | "opel te ottertnas of the voruler fancies] weatsioss af the. London market, 
& Amoy, 2ixt August Java ports a the firat official answer, thous |. HK, Govt, Lennar G4 Loen 108% ui] Plumping commoditics 
Me Bathe runt, Youn ; China the French , Government fiis [@44s Loan to, ee correction of te tenthy technical 
1 - AUR UR! « Bankes ILK. & 8. Bs a a 10 
A CPM LINE ad Hore gepulle teste Lon ete inks Be ete S| Rat’ NS 
a Sn iat at 0M | tered tan ahr Mercantila Ban ‘actors, 
gents I P. vi : | p e don without mention of a fixed [a B. casin: Hank, of Kant . of . 
(ORIENT JAVA AFRICA LINE). n ragu ; date, No American reply has] | Ineurancess | Canton Ing 3 we totaled 
Shin: Loe duc from Loading for ro Prague, July, 29. yet been given. es lee Ine, 206a8,, shares, 
“SURAAT SOENDA" — In Port Mauritius, Lourenco * Speaking at the International} Developments in Anglo-Ame-)|. ‘ghipptngs Douglases -X.D, 2¢6in; ILI & 


. Losers included Union Pacific, 
United: States Gypsum, Skelly Onl, 
Alliod Chemical, Caterpillar’ trac- 


Stocks 
182,06; 15 


10%, Alouka 
Can 92, 


American To- 


Chrysler 67%, Coe 4 
Solvents 25, 


17, General Electric 


», Good- 


Paper 48, Interna- 
& Tel 13%, Johns 


Now York Central 


15%, Packard Motors Pan 

American Alrwaya 10%, ae 

BR 20%, Radio Corp. gh, 
‘20%, Bik ip 1 

eynolds Tobacco 42, Schen- 

Grow Her Food. loy '28%, ‘Sears Roebuck 38%, 

Breil oll “92%, .  Sacon: Vacuum 

16%, Southern’ Paelfic 

dard Brands 30%, , Sta 

of Calif. 60%, Standard Olt of 

Nod. "7%, Stildebaker 21%, Union 

334%, Union Carbide 

. Rubber 47%, TA, Steal 29%, 


Republic | Steel 


3%, Stan- 
ndard Oil 


106%, 


22%, Westinghouse 


28%, Youngstown. Sheet & Tube 
66, Gen.+ Pub 
sociated Pr 


[Sidon Stock 


Utilities Taft An 


y Wella and Jorian Jenks, in 
gavernment policy is * ob. US. Accepts the Ma k 
nlciis: convene to Buble opinion] .” , Wshinpeete July 20, She syaendly ee eek peel: ar et 
ARRIVALS ° In addition, he pointed out that} “The United States State De-| | Food grown at home would 
- |trade cannot be expected to be] Partment has piven ‘an affirma-| be far more nutritious than Im-|: “Landon, Jul 
From DUP | sullsinctory in the absence of| ie reply to the British invitntion | ported’ food, ,they, sald,,adding|. yfoyt  gections, patkiceety 
“= [peace and conunerciul treaties fo-attend the’ Foreign Ministers | unnt the.day will come when de-| British “Government recurs, 


In 


recovery took 


_| Place, although this was not al-’ 


insiea : 


Jost, furthar 


uyers after tha 


or.on tho 


damage— 


singapore . Sth Auguse : on October 1, ft wns officlully an- 
MDAN-Y-BRYN" accesses . asomhay yin August | United Press. nounced today, tain to import thesfood she] was encountered soon after’ bual- 
& Karachi oe ee * : ~The spokesman declared that jeody, i Anaocintad Press, 
‘STRATUNAVER" UK, & Straits 18th August roe the reply had not yet been finally 
“PREWORLAS™ UK, Genon 20th August COTTON PRICES | approved but should be despatch- 
Rombay. Coldmbo . eq to Landon shortly.—Reuter, 
& Straits 2nd Ai, ~ New Orleans, July 30. sara any 
“PUNDUA” id vetodecatbae duseehiasaans Baraca 22nd August Cotton futures closed $2.70 Lo PETROL PRODUCT. | . 
“TRESILIAN uccuneeee Ulta, Genoa, August Teed canreets Boeank IN LORDS 
Bombay, Colombo 39.00-10; March $2.69; May London, July 
. Z & Straits, ; 32'16- 28; at hare 80; Spot otton The Anglo-Eranion Oi! and aie London, July 2. 
“TREWIDDEN” —viecsecceeees UK, Genen, waniiSd a belle dower PMiddling tillers Company has ‘agreed “The Lords today defeated the! ¢rials 
Bombay, Columbo. -. Rb. AS ie a Pre tang + jointly to form a new company t>| Government 05.14 in passing. an i 
& Straits. . September me TN Ow York, Jul 30. manufacture ‘chemicals jn | the; amendment to the Electricity Bill. fow . 
Sine iy Tho cotton textile market wan] Utited Kingdom from petroteum | to enuble holding companies to re. initia} aetback 
Se men fadiot. Wool od eae dull, in. close association with refi:ingy tain all thelr extraneous assets 
snr “70° READY | iiiehor  nricoe se y ongzations of (he Aueoelranisn.: but giving , the. electricity ' ati 
‘mae i . expected In trade circles. Rayons| £5,090 sq | thority the right to. acquire. the 
“SCYTIMA" ceases rererrrreeerreet) 0) & UK. 12th August oa 0,000 and. will be hed 
(Passcugers Only). aa 7 of offerings Asrocified Press. jointly ‘between the two com: nevis of any of the compantes’ oat 
“TREVAYLOR'. © accesses Stralty, Genoa 16th August e—wnsroclitted Press panios,—Reutor, Pei Reuter. 
& 


: ‘About eleven ,, holdir |:  {VARAN ii KS 
British India S$. N. Co. Ltd. r] pines wos cove dein Ohi! FAR BAST 
ARRIVALS but the amounts t ae oe SERVICE i 
Sine FROM DUE vestments 0 fig real tld M/S “REINHOLT” 
*DAVIKEN” sevsececeeeeseerscerso aden & Early Augen 


‘deft, in. 


id where. th in 
: re. WI 
ed. pre 


on the. 6th and- 6th. “August: cat ; 


SNOTE: 


. 88 “President Monroe” ,,,, 


i . “CASTLEVILLE” 


tia. ROSEVILLE: . «. 
ms. “CASTLEVILLE": 05000045541 


have. left :the| -. 
secon, _ AIL. proken,:. chaf- 


AMERICAN: PRESIDENT: LINES. = 


REFAIGERATION—SPECTAL: CARGO, OIL TANES— 
: CARGOCAIRE--SPECIE 


’ SAILINGS : 


‘SAN FRANCISCO AND LOS ANGELES 
VIA SHANGHAI, KOBE, YOKOHAMA & 
‘ HONOLULU ° 


88 “General Meiga” Aug. 1 


88 “President Madison (uit "Yokota. oo AMES 7 
88 “General Gordon” Aun. a. 
88 “Marine Adder” .......... Sept. . 4 


Third Class Pain Faro from. Hongkong to Paciflo 
Coast Is US$175.00 Plus USS$8, 
Citizens, 


__NEW YORK AND HAVANA VIA MANILA; , 
SINGAPORE, COLOMBO, ‘COCHIN, BOMBAY, , : 
SUEZ AND MEDITERRANEAN PORTS - 


88 “Marine: Flier” .... 
88 “Mount Manafleld" 


88 “General Molgs” 1 
88 “General Gordon” Aur. . 


AMERICAN PRESIDENT LINES, LTD. 


St. George's Bldg. Tel. Nos, 28172 /2B175. , 


Pacific Ion Gott Litza,Gon, 


TRANS PACIFIC SAILINGS 
To San Francisco & Los Angeles 
—SPECIAL CARGO OIL TANKS— 


: Due Sails : 
8.8. “LIGHTNING” Aug. 2 Aus. 2 Via Okinawa & 
‘ . Yokohaina 
5.S. “SURPRISE” We tes ode » 12 Via Okinawa 
8.8. “CIINA: . : 
VICTORY” » IG. wo 16 Via Yokohama’ 
. “CHINA BEAR" » 49 o A Via Shanghai 


: & Yoko! 
88. oe REPUBLIC’ , 2%, 24) Via Okinawa 


“Ariivals from New York, Boston, 
Other Atlantic Ports via Panama 


gs. “LOOKOUT” ...... 


.. Due Aig. 21d. 
8, “STAGHOUND” . Led t 


c Duc 


Sailings to New York, Boston, ; 
Other Atlantic Ports via Panama Canal 


— SPECIAL CARGO OiL TANKS — 
8.8. “LOOKOUT” 


Veeenesenenecsneunen enaresey eaestenaenee Balls Aug. ‘Nth. 
For Fult Particulars’ Call : 


UNITED STATES LINES co." 


General Agents 
B14, Succi eulldings Rue 31261 ov Hines) 


The SHFERISH EAST ASIATIC co, Ltd 


b for persons who aro not UBF 


ug. 20th? 


' 


MY. NAGARA” 2, 


: Loading Hong Kong, on or about 10th t August. 
for 


PORT .; SAID,. GENOA MARSEILLES, -ANTWERP, 
ROTTERDAM, COPENHAGEN, OSLO, GOTHENBURG. 
‘AND GDYNIA.. 


ry 
Tahks available suitable for the carriage of oll In aie 


“For further particulars apply to:— 


GILMAN & CO., LTD. 


aoe, ‘Telephone 31146, wo 


KEAVEress LINE 


SAILINGS. 


mieel to LOS ANGELES, SAN iRaNGLsco, 
_. PORTLAND, VANCOUVER & SEATTL 
» “ROSEVILLE”, ....,....ese0000+ SALLING, Cth ee 
cretaerenestees, SAILING wth ocr. 
ARRIVALS FROM PACIFIC COAST | 


eect arta aee ‘DUE Jat AUGUST | 
, SAILING FOR SINGAPORE” fee eees Std AUGUST 


eevee, DUE ‘bt SEPT. 
PASSENGER -ACCOMMODATION, BULK OIL’ TANKS, 


_ Chinese. Freight Agents, » 
HOO. FOOK PING ° 


BANK LINE 
. (CHINA) LTD; ':. 


THE BANK, LINE (China) Ltd. King’s Billding. To}. ‘27T98 eae 
- i aan RECT TT rier tear re 


Ee STUER TE 


MARITI 


eva Ae ‘DEATH St NTENGE 


3 ME the vard's| Defers. Plea la gmat 
Sp [The Yard's| Defence: Plea In |ShippingList) 
: The Ys War. Crimes. Trial |, Pp = ae 


Sentence of déath by hanging was: ‘passed. ‘by No. 5 
London, July 29. War Crimes Court. yesterday.on Spt. M eae 
Scotland Yard today Kamada Yasushi, who was found guilty. of ill- 
se AM ; answered Moscow's ‘treatment resulting in the death of two un-. 
: De bab : charges that it ‘was in- Y 


pian G: DEPARTMENT 
Uo Pedder Street 
* ‘Tel, 30311. 
General Managers. 
INDO.CHINA S. 
SAILINGS 


S$/S “MEANDROS" | 
ARRIVING F¥OM EUROPE VIA PORTS 
ON OR ABOUT AUGUST 3rd, 
‘ LOADING FOR : 
MARSEILLES, CASATLANCA, HAVRE, ANTWERP, 


iF iD: 

. ehh a ee | 
-t1aNGB NG” eee “Singapore - Penang = & 
 AWINGBANG scone eee AS BET Brus. 


g soe. $0 Shanghal 4 p.m. Sth Aug. 
. “EMPIRE Wye" veneer TO Stralts & Calcutta Ith Aug. . 


Anbul (Ba 8.) ; 
‘Aniaranthus. (Wel 
‘Anhlock (Wallem) . 

| Holssovain (4.0.0.1. 
Canon Bar, (Carroll). . 
‘Catoline Moller (Mollera) 


Dona Aurora (Oy Gn 


SOW ley ans bodi Ne Worst to nd ce 

Te tr ae a ee - -' =| a 8. to s Thy 
Arriving from EUROPE via Ports Wai-lam, SEE SEW OO A oon: Ba tg, 

BIE” 


«End of September 
aMiddte of October 


LEST, LOUBERT 
nly, “CHAMPOLLION" 


Sailing to EUROPE via Ports 


“LT-ST, LOUBEIC?E BIE" 
“CHAMPOLLION" 


.Bedliuning October 
End of October 


~~, 


Haiphong 


®H, 
my, 


is. “DO-MUU-VE" duc ‘from Middle 


August. 


Sailing for Haiphong End Aug. - 


For Parsoge and Freight apply. to 


CIE DES MESSAGERIES MARITIMES 


Queen's Building, Tel, 26051 (three Lines). 
oy ? 


_ BUTTERFIELD & SWIRE 


"OAD CENTRAL 
+) Vrivate Exchange. 


1. CONNALGUL 
Telephones: Aus: 


Agents: CHINA NAVIGATION CO., LTD. 
; SAILINGS TO 


» Amay, Swatlow, Singapore & Penang 8 am. 
Ist. Aug. 
» Amoy, Shanghnal & Tlentsin 2 p.m. 2nd Aug, 
oo. Swatow 3 p.m, Ird Aug, 
‘ Kobe 4 p.m. Ird Aug. 
/Amoy Swatow & § npapore 2 p.m, 4th Aug. 
Shanghal 4 p.m. 6th Aur. 
Singanore. Batavia, Sourabaya 

bo Mareassar DL. Ith Aug 
Sharghal 4 p.m. Bth Aug. 


ARRIVALS FROM 
». Switow avm. Ist Aug. 
ntow & Amoy p.m, Ist Aug. 
Juva & Singapore D.L, 2nd fur. 
Shanghat & Keelung 4th Aug. 
Shanghal 7 a.m, 6th Aug. 


RIVER LINE 


*WVUSUEN" Arrives 5 pm, 2nd Aug. 
Sally 7 wm, 4th Aug. 


‘ 
MBATSUAN” ooo ceetecsseeeteeeel? 


sd 


“SINKIAN 


HUPER" 
HUNAN" 
“"POYANG 
“KWELYANG 
“FUKIEN” 
“PAKHOI’ 


‘SIIENGKING” 


HUNAN" 
“KWELYANG* 
“FUKIEN” 
“PAKHOL” 
“SHENGKING 


Agents: BLUE FUNNEL LINE 
U.K. SERVICE 


Arrivals from ° 
UK, via Straits 
U.K, vin Straits 
' Sailings to 
sececeeDdverpool vie 
Port Sald 


Sth Aug. 


AMENELAGS" 
25th Aug. 


“EUMAEUS” 


. 2nd Aug. 
sonaing, in duly 


“SARPEDON"  ... 


NEW YORK SERVICE 
Arrivals from ¢ 
U.S.A, vin Manila 


1 
“AIAK” 


__Agents: Australian-Oriental Line, Ltd. 
Arrivals From 
Australia 
Sailings to 


© “SHANSI" Loads Sandakan, Sydney 
& Meloourne ath August 


Ld “YUNNAN” Sydney & Melbourne 25th August 
* Accepts Cargo to'N. 4. ports onathrough B/L, 


End Adie 


“YUNNAN” 18th August 


¢ AU The Above Subject To Alteration Without Notice. 


BOOKING AGENTS for _B.O.A.C. 


for Passage aud I Freight Particulars Apply .Tq The, Above. 


BARBER-WILHELMSEN LTD. 
M/V. “LIDVARD". 
LOADING ABOUT THE %th AUGUST, 1947 


for. 


NEW YORK via PANAMA 
calling at . 


San. Francisco, Los Angeles, Panama, Boston, 
New York, Philadelphia, & Baltimore 


For freight and further particulars apply toy 


: DODWELL & co., LTD.:,: AGENTS | 
fener & Shanghai Bank Pits : __ Belophone aboat, - 


8, MARCHEN pers 
“GERTRUDE :MAE. Sk” 


efficient by bringing into 
court the gang who rob- 
bed the flat of 
Karavaev, first Secretary | } 
to the Russian Embass} Y 
here. 


It was the theft of various 
articles from Mor. Karavaev'a 
apartment that Jed ‘Moscow to named. Chinese. 
mnke its neeusntiona ~againat The case was heard before 
Lenion’s proud law enforcement No. 6 War Crimes Court, com- 
Hgency. posed of Lieut, Col, R.C. Laming 

Talay, James 22.| (Dent. of the JAG India), Bar- 
win sentenced to three 
nnd Sidney Stallard, 19, 
Koure, 18, and John 
17, to reformatery terma. ‘ 

Jundiec Laurence Vine asked:| Major M. Ip Ormaby, West 
"Ix there nny suggestion of any:] Yorkshire Regiment, was the 
Uhing aeeret having been stolen?” Prosecuting Olficer, The ac- 

The prosecutor, Mr, ‘Griffiths | cused Was represented by Mr, 
danes, repileds “I understand Hirnkawa Chiaki, assisted by 
there was never ony-.such sug-| Lieut, D.C. Banfield 43 Advi- 
estion by Mr, Karavaev.” “—|] sory Officer, 


Es Press In the course of hig’ 
= Fund 


one other Chinese, 

Kamada was — charged with 
Boris ine concerned, between June 
. and August $1, 1946, In the 
ii-trentment of four named Chi- 


Kwan-voo, Ng Wo-shun — and 
Ny Shing and others, which I). 
treatment ‘resulted In the death 


Dawaon, 


Arthur]. S$. Butterfeld (Indian 


Gamble, Members. 


closing 
address for the defence, Mr. 
Hirakawa, sald:— 

“To jpauin with, Iet us consi. 
der why these employees of the 
Toikoo Deokyard were arrested 
by the necused in the month of 
June 1945, Reports had been 
recelyed that o considerable 
amount of stealing and pllfering 
was taking place in the Dock- 
yard ond In addition that there 
had sprung up a form of slave 
trafic dealing in coolie labour- 
ers. Employees were being 
kidnapped and taken ‘into China, 


“Civil Case” 


“J would remind the Court 
that work of this nature does 
not usually eome under the! 
Kempeital, for it Ia really a civil 
case and not o military matter, 


Singapore, July 29. 
The Forefgn Exchange De. 
Kong-chian, Chairman of the 
South China Flood Relief Com- 
mittec, that the British Govern- 
sment con'd not give permission 
to remit relief funds to South 
China, 

The reason given was that the 
umount of rellef funds permit- 
ted to China from ti whole of 
the British Empire has already 
tenched the ‘limit. 

At a meeting ‘of the, South 
China Flood Re'ief Committee 
this afternoon, members. OX 
pressed indignation at ‘thé’ re. 
fusal, The committee requested 
Chairman 
take 
with 


ture of what was going on inthe 
Dockyard, the Kempeltai were 
called in on this case. , Strictly 
Rpeaking, this fs not a case that 
should be dealt with by a War 
Crimes Court, for Kumada was 
acting in a civilian capacity, 
carrying, out a normal civil 
police Investlyation into a civil. 
lian matter, and I ask the Court 
to take this point into considera. 
tlon.” 
upproached |’ Mr. Hirakawa, then reviewed 
the evidence which had been 
adduced and concluded, by suh- 
mitting that the evidence of the 
prosecution was quite. inguffi- 
clent to prove the charge and 
that the accused was not guilty, | 


Lee Kong-chian® to 
up further newotintfons 
this Singapore -Govern- 


. bee tonight 
the Acting Governor, who ex- 
pressed sympathy with the re- 
ef committee und promised to 
nahle the British Government, 
requesting It to reconsider the 
request,—Central News, 


"EXPRESS CAKGO LINER'SERVICES 
TO AND FROM PACIFIC & ATLANTIC COASTS 


U.S.A, LOADING DATES 


” Loads Vessel 


(Mid August mv. “DONA. ANICETA" 
(Mid Sept. omy. “BALI” * 


Enrly August nv. “MANGALORE” 
ARRIVALS. «°° 


‘Date 


Date: 


Allan(ic Coast 
, Pacific Const 


From 


' Wesset- 

Atlantic Coast) , 
via d 

los Angeles ) 


inv. “DONA NATY". 
mv. “HALEAND”: 


my. “BATAAN” 


Earl Sept. 
= Late "sept. 


Pacific Coast 4th August 


For * Date 
San Franelsen) 
Los Angeles. ) ’ ‘ 


THE DE LA RAMA STEAMSHIP CO: INC. 


| Pedder Bulidine.. ‘Chines Shipping: 
‘Tel: 23076—22078 Bele, ie 


oth Aunist | inv. “BATAAN” 


tse 


partment today hotifed Mr, Lee 


but in ylew of the serious na-: 


a an Pm Fm Memorles. 


flea: : 


In reply, Major Ormaby anid 
in pn ti 

“The prosecition » has 
charged with proving that 


been 
the 


nese clyiiiana, Li Wal-lam, Chong accused committed a War Crime | roo Halne (Waltem) . 1... abe 


between Juno 1 and August 31, 
1945, apecificAlly that he was 
concerned in the ill-treatment of 


causing bodily suffering to 
them’ and that this {l-treatment 
resulted in the death of aix of 
them. 

“The evidengs of ill-treatment 


from three of the named victims, 
find Ng Wo-shun. 
Old Acquaintances: 


“The. ill-treatment — ranged 
from simple beatings, suspen: 
elon by one arm, burning of a 
very severe mature’ .und_ that 
most serious and ~ dangerous 
form of torture known as water 
torture, The Court had heard 
the. witneasey and it was for the 
Court.to decide whether or. not 
they spoke the truth. 

“However, there is one nolot 
revardiug probity which, it is 
submitted the Court sucwa 
in mind, The events of which 
complaint Ig made occurred in 
three Gendarmeries, The wit: 
nesses weye old, acquaintances. 
Now it ts possible that the Court 
may question the veracity, par. 
teulurly in details, of one or 
more of these witnesses.. View- 
ing the allegations as a whole, 
it muat be conceded that the pos- 
sibility of connivance or con: 
spiravy between the witnesses, 
each of ‘whom has named the 
accused os the perpetrator, Is so 
remote that its accéptunce: would 
outrage commonsense, 

“The evidence of deatha re. 
sulting from t{Il-treatment at the 
hands of the accused Js less 
direct and can be referred to by 
‘Inference, only, 

“The defence was a entegori- 
cal denin) of the charges and no 
comment would be made. The 
Court would weigh the possibili- 
tles and give judgment in accor. 
dance. with the welght of oul: 
dence, 

“Everybody Js presumed to 
know the consequences of his 
own acta, That: lays the res- 
ponstbility of knowledge directly 
on the perpetrator, Hin misde- 
meanours, if the Court’ accepts 
them os proved, must be consi. 
dered _ of . the. gravest... The. 
Court has heard the evidence 
and ft remaing for the Court to 
decide on the guilt or otherwise 
of the accused.” 


SHIPPING FARES 
INCREASED 


ba) 
a London, July 30. 
Several®’ shipping ‘ companies 
here today onnounced a ‘20-per. 
cent increase [fn ‘passenger fares 
from London .to Hong Kong, 
Singapore ond Shanghal, : 
Passenger fares from London to 
Hong’ Kong will be 
from £103 to £123, to Singapore 
from £93 to £122 and to Shonghal 
from £108 to. £129:—-Central |’ 
News, 4. a ” 


RADIO 


“2BW: Hong-Kong frondcastlag 
on .a frequency of 845 kilocycics 
from 12.80,to 2,00 .p.m., and 9.30 
to 11.00 p.m, and. also on 9.62 
megacycles ‘ih the .81-metro band 
from 12.80 to 2:15; -7.30 to 8.u0 
and 9.16 to an00 pan. .. 


‘PILE, , 


12.80 ‘p.m. 
_ Weather. Repo and | 
rata... 


1,30 p.ra—Oreheatral Interlude, : 
4 


7 root “and Ills 01 
1.B.G.: Tranveriptinn * Bervices; 
MA", with : Tocamy -Handley.‘ 


inereased*| * 


Edith Moller (Jardinve) 

Emp, Fiarer (Jardine) 

Emp. Wikia (4.0.7. 

Emp. Nightingale (Mackinnon M. 

Emp, Tern. (Wlillamson) ..ceeeew. KML 

Emp, Wye (Jardine) .. Macklo's 

Yat. 

Duey 14 

Kin, May 
oe 4 


Ht. Sandusky (Rank Line) 
Ganandoe (Wallem) ...., 
Hal Hela (China Mer.) 
Hal Tan (Douetas Cop 


of Ng Shing and five other un-] Chinese, some of them nanicd,} Hane Bang (Jardine: 


Hawksbury (Wallem) ¢ 
Hetnrleh.Jeasen (Jebsen) 
Hindustan (Jardine)... 
Hu Kwang (Mackinnon M. 
Haln Kong, Bo (Wallem) 
tune Haln’ (China my . 
Hupeb, (Ba 8). 


yenrs,| rister-ut-Law, President, Mafor|and the deatha has come to you| ius tre itine; 


Jongutte (U.N Tt 


) 
Catway,| Grenadfera) and Captain. I, E.{ Lt WotJom, Chang Kavan.woo | Kenilworth (WUllarsson} _ 


Khenit Lim (Ho Bet 
Mleinella “(A.2,C.) 
Lady Welmer 


Laura Maersk (Jebsen) . 
Lily (Trans-Ocean) ... 
tok Bang Cardinrds, 
Marchen Maerak, (Jebseny . 
Maabate (8. Chinn) . 
Lusmt (Hank Line), 
Marvea (Thoreacn) 
Marylock (Walle) 
Marpessa (DB. & 8.) . 

Ne! Nan (Bycony) . 
Mel Pins (Bocony) . 
Mei Shan (Hocuny) ... 
Memnon (MW, & fy ou, 
Mowlln (‘Tn Hing) 
Nogara (Ullman) . 


+Newchwang (1, & 


Panamanian (Wallem) | 

Verllock (Wallom on 

Peony (Trans-Ocean) , 

Ving Wo (Jerding'sy 

Doyany (TL & 8)... 

Pinard (J.0.0.L.) 

Frimper (Jebahun) .. 

Relnhott (Wallom) .. 

Bam Winged (Bank 1 

Barpedon (Ih, & . 

Shanst (1 & 8.) 

Shahrokh (Nemazee) + 

Bhong Lb (Overwurtd Co.) 

Rinklane (I. & HA) esas 

Httmat. Bounda (J.C.J.14} 

Tatshan Henk (Mach, Mack.) 

Tatung (BD. & 8.) 

Titan (Jardine) , 

TohJer (Larsen). 

Whangpu (1). & A 

Worhann (1, & B,) 

ARRIVALS 

20.2 Marchen Macrak (Sebwen) . 6.5 
Vo Hat (Kine Tal) 

80.7) Wbin (Tea Hine) see 
Relnholt (Wallem) ....) Kin, 
“Hal Hain (China Mer.) wo... 

«Laura Maersk (Jebsen) 4... Addl 

BXPECTED ARRIVALS 

3.7 India (East Aalatle) .., 

1H Roseville (flank Line 
Swartenhondt (J.C..L. 


Kin, wht. 


Gon, Mule (AP. 
Fuklen (1, & 8) 
Liabtning (U.8.14) 
Lookout (U.8.1.) 
ou Twinfalls Victory (Bank Line) ° 
DEPARTURES 
80.7 Tsinan .... 
Van. Heute 
Po Mat was, . 
Chen Helm yeseiee 
Coastal. Champlun 1... 
Emp. Labrador . 
Mul Hock 
Caltex 2 


29 


see Bwatow 31,7 
» Binzapore 4.8 
» Bhanghal 9,8 


3L7 Peony va, 
Mlly seeeyene 
Dona Aurors 


« Teamkong 1.6 
coos Manila 2,8 


sé 


POST OFFICE 
MAIL NOTICE 
Outward Mails 


Untecs otherwiey stated,» Remistered 
Articles and Parce) Posts close 80 minutes 
cartier than'the Ordinary Mall. If matl 
el before 10 am. Reglstored and 
Marcela will close at & p.m, on previous 


day. 
THURMDAY, JULY 31 
Canton (By Train), Tam =. 
Maeno, Tylnshan and Shekkl, & a.m, 
‘Alrmall for Swatow and Amoy, (eee) | 
9.40 nm. (Ord) 10 F 
» Canton (By Traln), 
Amoy and Bwatow, 3 
Bhanghal, 3 p. 
Reel letters and cards oe, ‘for 


' 
‘yla, Colombo, Bytney and Autkland, Kaw. 
toon C.F, (Rez) 2.90 pom, (Ord) 4 

+ G.P.0.. (Rex) # p.m., (Ord) 3.90 


FRIDAY, “AUGU . 
Canton (Dy. “Mrafn)s! 7 ata. : 
Taléshan and ‘Shekil, 2'ain. 


Ordinary fetters and ‘cards only» tor | 


re 
u 


Japan, 10 am, 
Formos via Keelung, “Noon. 


iareparth " Colombo, Sours- 
ba .. Bydney and Avekiand, é 


‘| pm, Oud): $30. pam 1 


““Afrinall for Balgon only, 


i] (Ord) $20 tum, 


Belay: 


Home . News, 


+ Alrmail: for 


Alrmalt: toe; jAmey, * shanghsl, Nankirtiz, 
itgakon, nals aid Pe “(Bag.) 3 


Canta, (Dy trata): acme 
rads Bbentt, 8a 


Twambarie 34.7, 


: “GREENVILLE VICTORX" 


“WINGgaNar 
ia ANG"... 


5. 
3 i aan 
 WOS 


on AAR ci mar BA Cay, MARR 
Kapore and for dl + TAWAU, 
LADHAD- ‘DATU and UDAT, JESSE vin Snndakon, 


m Shanghat 3rd Aug. 
. From Stealth Calcuttn 10th Aug. 
«. From Sandakan 10th Aug. 
rom Cuateutta, Straits & 
Sandakan Teth Aug: 


fom Pe ' General Manogers . 
AUSTRALIA CHINA LINE LTD. 


M.Y. “HINDUSTAN” «Loads for: * -Rejang, 
Sydney, Melbourne and 
Adelaide early August. 
Accepts. cargo for. all. 
Tasmanian and New. 
Zealand ports on through 
Bills of Lading.. Sails 
about ‘10th August. 


t" : : oe 
MNO“CLAN MACDOUGALL” ...Loads ‘Sydney late “July for 
-Kure and Mong Kong, Generat 

“ and refrigerated cargo.:. 


“ : Due Mong Kong early Septem-: 


‘Sudject to alteration without notice. 


‘AU intending Passengers are requested to replater thetr names as 
far as possible in edvanee of the time at which they wish to leave, 


. ’. Agents: GLEN LINE:LTD.. 
MV. “GLENBEG” Loads for’ ‘London, Ant-. 
; werp,, Rotterdam, ,.Ams- 
-terdam and pombe 
(direct) Early Sept, . 


, ouTWARD 
‘pr tAN” 


(Ex BAMGARA) .......s000Artlved Brom M{datesbesugh, 
London, Port Said yla Straits 
Diycharging Buoy Al, 

ovo Duel from Antwerp, ,. Hambiirg, 
Rotterdam and London via 
Straits mid, ‘August. i 


8.8. 


rx 


ALY. GLENDRO” 


avtens 


Agents: , é 
WESTERN candy’ STEANSHIPS LTD. 


° PRINCE LINE LTD... . 
. . PACIFIC pee LINES INC. 


See separate, advertisomenta, 


PACIFIC TRANSPORT LI ‘LINES: 


. : " EXPRESS TRANS-PACI FIC ‘SERVICE 


“PHILIPPINE TRANSPORT” 


Due about ith: August 
_ nn UOADS » 
8th AUGUST 
FOR: 


SHANGHAI, MANILA, CEBU & 
SAN FRANCISCO 


Loads for 
Late Aug. Manila : é 
2nd Sept. ‘Manila & Cebu 
6th Sept. Shanghai, Taku Bar 
& Yokohama . 
“CAPITAL victory” . Wth Sept. Manila : 
3, Limited Passenger AccéMimodation. 
CARGO ACCEPTED ON THROUGH BILLS OF LADING FoR 
ALL PACIFIC COAST AND INLAND POINTS IN 
NORTH-AMERICA : 


SPECIAL .QIL.CARGO TANKS . ; 
JARDINE, MATHESON &: CO., LTD. 


16 Pedder Street, : Telophone $0341. 
: CHINESE DEPT’ 81468" wt 


ae, 


Ship Veit oe Due 


NEW ZEALAND VICTORY” 
“PACIFIC TRANSPORT" 


fh 


THE EAST ASIATIC CO, LTD. 


OF .COPENHAGEN : 


és. “TRANQUEBAR” 


iodaing about 1 18th August. 


ADEN, borT BAID, ‘TANGIER, ANTWERP, ROTTERDAM, 
_gtOPeNRSGEN, SOREN SCR EENEURG & OSLO. : 


eo 


aie EAST Asiatic 5 eb 
_Queen’s Bids. acl fete. see Ta A411 &, pr 


FOTOPRINT | 


comes 


: 


PHOTOGRAPHIC 


1 
9. 


Dramatic 


Yachting ‘a 
Trophy _ 
Goes Home 


' Ghisgow, July 20, 

The famorte. vachtings trophy, 
the Seawanhaka Cup, returned 
to the United States after 19 
years, when the United States 
challenger, Djinn, today beat 
the defending ynehit, .fohan, by 
ope minute 80 seconds. 

The cotrrae for today's rice, 
the third of the deries, was 
Windward ned leeward two 
rounds, making dd miles in at, 
with the weather mark in the 
rection Of Ascvog. 

Diinn quickly took Che lead 
inthe first ley, gaining a 
minute, but Johan took an brief 
fend as they appronehed — the 
firato mark between Barga and: 
Skelmorde, Phe challenger, 
Fovever, took advantage ofa 
anlek change of wind and, shot 
through Johan's weather course 
to dead by 46 seconds ut the 
first turn, ‘ 

Johan fost heavily on the run 
back and was never able to, 
overhaul the Amerlean chalteng-: 
er, who was a comfortable wine 
nor: United Press, 


Séa rch For 


BoxersAmong 
Miners 


SERVICES | 
D'Aguilar St, HK. 
Middle Rd, Kow. 


Go 


Glorious Goodwood's, f 
today under a_ tropi 


in the Stewards 


This three.year-old was held up 
an his way to the course wher; 
“4 motorcoach broke down In 
front of his horsebox, As. thne 
wus short, his tralner, Noel 
Morlysy, the new Master of 
Beckhompton, saddled hind on the 
road and dashed him Into the 
paddock just in time for the 
champlon jockey, Gordon Hi- 
chards, to get him to the post. 
He came back In terrific style 
ond, overcoming last: year's win. 
ner, Commissar, close home won ce 
desperate Minish by a neck for hls 
Yorkshire owner, Councilor Ri. 
chard White, of Wakefield. 

Tn carrying cight stone — ten, 
Closcburn ‘xet up a record for n 
three.year.old in this ‘event, 
which Is now 107 years’ ald. 
Closehurn, starting ot [00 to 
seven, come with a great run. at 
the finish to ovegcame Comrmilssar, 
starting at 100 to ax, with Fairey 
Fulmar one length away third af 
Lf runners, . 

There wax a photo finish ta 
avvide the third place, this falling 
lo Fairey’ Fulmar, who just hosed 
out Val de Grice, who made must 
of the running, 

Miss Dorothy Paget brought off 
0 double, winning the Craven 


‘Victory At 
odwood 


Goodwood, Sussex, J uly 29, 


our-day meeting opene 
eal sun with a dramatic 


win for the Yorkshire trained- colt Closeburn 
Cup over six, furlongs, the 
premier sprint handicap of. the meeting. 


Test Uinpir 


|Australia. : 


: HONG KON 
ae; 


Shocks 


Sydney, July 30. 
The action of Frank Chester, 


ij one of the umpires, In stopping 


the we of fast bowlera in the 
Leeds tert match between Eng- 
land and South  Afrlea, has 
natonished Australia. 

W. H. Jeunes, Secretary of 


All the world scemed to want| the Australian Bourd of Con: 


to be at Goolwood und 


45,000) trol, said; “I know of none 


tace cards were sold out before} struction which a'lows umplres 


the first race, TraMe blocks 
stretched for miles and many ar- 
Tived breathless und. on fout, 
White there aro no oMcint Ngures 
“available, today's crowd must 
have beoten all records, Most 
rucegcers were dressed in summer 
attire, but une man struggled 
thraugh ‘the sweltering afternoon 
Cressed in morning ‘Goat and top 
hat.-~Reuter, 


Feller 
Stops The 
Red Sox 


Now York, July 30. 

In the Ametiean League the 
Boston Red Sox. defeated by fire. 
Hatley Hob Felder and the Cleve. 
Jnnd Indians 6 to 1, dropped tO" 
games behind the fengue leading 
New York Yankees. Indian tirat 
sucker Ed Rob n hit twa 
homers, It was Feller’s 123th win 
of the avitson, 


Hendicup with Fine Prospect and 
the Richmond Stakes with: 
Birthday Greetings, 


Easy Victory 


London, July 30, 

Britain turned to its miners 
an Tuesday ina search for new 

* champions to restore the batter. 
ed prexthee of British boxing. 

A nationwide e'imination con. 
test for amateur boxers uMONK | 
the = 720.000 miners was an- | 
nounced by the National Coat» 
Board in etnjunetion with Lon. ! 
don fight’ promoter Jack Solo- 
MYNnH, : a 

"In addition to promoting the 
miners’ interest in sport. we 
hope this wiht attract more men | 
to the mines and develop new 
champions,” said Stanley New. 
son, Coal Bond Publle Relg- 
Gions head in annyuncing the 
acheme, 

The first elimination matches 
were set tentatively to begin | 
aicur the collieries themuelves i! 
September, Winners of elyhte 
divisional quarter finaly in alt 
welehty will Chen be brought te 
‘London for the finals next! 
March. Newson and that the 
project was enneelved during. a 
“very successful” tour of the 
mining areas by American 
heavywelght Joe Baksi, after 
he ld beaten Britain's’ Bruce 
Woodcock. 

Qthers who endorsed — the 
pha inc'uded WIN) Lawther, 
Prosident of the National Un- 
jon of Mine Workers, and, the 
Ministry of Fuel and Power— 
Associated: Press. 


Gloucester Keeps 


Stakes of one and a half miles. 


Bivthday Greetings, a gon of the 
former Derby winner, Blue Peter, 
won the six furlong Richmond 
Stakes so cuslly that he Js already 
heing spaken of us next year+ 
Derby winner, . N 

Me beat by two lengths the 
Amerivon-bred colt Black Tarquin 
owned by Mr. Wilthim Woodward, 
chairman of the New York Jodkey 
Club, . 

The Maharaja Guekwar — éf 
Baroca's Irish , Derby winner, 
Sayajirao, duly landed the odd: 
Jaid on him to win the Warren 


but although the jockey, Edgar 
Britt, did not’ pick up his whip, 
it'did not looks us if he could have 
beaten the runner-up, Glendower, 
by much more than the half. 
length that he won by. \ 

The Indian prince looked Uket 
landing a double when his fly, 
Port Blane, wag out in trent in 
the flvefurlong Halnaker Stakes, 
but she falled to last the heme 
stroteh and the race te the Irish. 
bred Fatr Trial. Richards rode a 
splendid Anish to get him, home. 


Joel Victory 
The King's calt, Howdah, once 
ugain made favourite, was na 
mutch for the Pride of India In 


Up The Pace 


London, July 29. 


‘Forcing a win over Leicestershire during extra ° 


time today, Gloucestershire re , 
pin the county cricket table: with 


leadershi 
‘Middlesex. 

Both these countlea recorded 
their 13th victory-of the season 
and have 164 points. Derby- 
Shive are third with 124, and 
Lancashire, beaten for the firat 
‘time’ this season, are fourth, 

The ‘results of game which 
ended today were: 

, At Kennington Oval: Surrey 
drew ‘with Yorkshire, + Yorks 
-  -863-and 102 for eight (Kelghley 
» ‘60, ° Laker four for 40), Surrey 
BTL (Alec Bedger. 61). : 

At Maldatone; Kent’ drow ‘with 
. Evsox,+. Kent 680 for -aix de. 


~ clared and. 142. for three (Todd 


G0 not out), Essex 602 (Pearce 
» 92, Smith 67). 00° : : 
. At Leicester 

beat Leicestershire by .71.-runa, 
- Gloucestershire‘ 267.and 198 


14 pam, .- 


252 and 188.—Reuter,: 


Gloucestershire y 


re retained a shared 


wickets?) Warwickshire’ 98 and 
267 (Cranmer 79), Worcester-| 
shire 882 and 24 for no wickets, 

At Cardiff: Glamorgan beat 
Sussex by four wickets. Glamor- 
gan 898 for eight declared and 
164 for six (Davica 74,. Dyson 
560). Sussex 126 and 362 
(Bartlett 76; Cox 104, Onkes 63). 

At. Nottingham: Middlesex 
-beat Notts by 287 runs. Middle- 


sex 403 for elyht declared and 


304 for four declared, Notts 


J 
OP ee ator 


BOWLS TEAM 


The following have been chosen 
‘to represent Kowlgon | ‘Cricket. 
Club “against: Indian . Recreation, 
Club. Jn‘ a frlendly lawn: bowls 
match’ at, K.C.C,.on ‘Saturday: at |’ 
H.°. Gittins, V.C.;Labrum, 7. 


Lock''and MLN. Ralsen’ (akip).° 
Pruser, J.) 
EC, Fincher 


J. Chub! 


“St. Louis 


five 
10 


run 
beat 


CHicags stared a 
seventh Inning uprising 


Philadetihia 6 to din the National |. 


League. 
In the Cubs big inning. they re- 
sintered four hits and four walks, 
The winning run was scored on 
aowalk issued oby Phe hurler 
Charles Schonz. 


Scores: 
National 
ee, 
49 


66 


Wyse, 


he 
0 
1 


Philnde' 
Chicago cite 
Winning piteh 


Iphin vices. ; 
er itant 
Brooklyn vic... 
Ney York oo. 0...... 4 
Cinginnati 


New York Giants 
Cincinnaty Reds... 


Brooklyn Dodgers c 
St. Louis Cardinals... 


Boston Braves .0. 0... 
Pittsburgh Pirates ..,, 


American 


ta order a change of: bowlera in 
any circumatances,” 

Jack Scott, the Australlan 
umpire who stood in tha. teats 
between England and Australia 
this year, declared: “An ume 
rire cannot tell a captain not 
ta use certain bowlers. If, the 
light ix bad, the correct proce- 
dure ix for the batsman to ap- 
peal and for the umpire to al- 
low the appeal if he thinks frat 
bowling is dangerous to the 
batamen." 

W. J. O'Reilly, the former 
test bowler, atated:. “If the 
facta are as 1 understand them, 


duty, No | Austraiian captain 
worthy of his salt would . be 
dirtated to By an umpire fn 
such oa munner.”-—Assoalated 
Presa, : 


Cleveland eo eee 
Beston 2... 


* Winniay piteher “Rob 


Chicago 4... teen ie 
Philadephia 


——-. 


Nine people on board—an 
and four Britens—we: 


Chester grossly averatepped his’ 


G, THURSDAY, JULY 31, 1943. 


FI 


AT THE MERCY : 
OF THE BRUTE 


Lowes (England), July 30. - 
Schoot teacher Ronatd Hovk 
today war free to crea at 
hia mother-inelaw—wwith the 
court’s permission, 
A judge dtaminacd hid wifc'a 
divorce mult after declaring, 
\ “It haw not yet been held that 
tf a husband happene to bc 
rude.to hia wife's mother that 
Te cane for dissolving « mar- 
rlage."—Uniled Preas, 


Big Increase In 
Radio. Licences 


Compared with last year, tha 
number of owners of radlo-sets 
has incrensed by almost 150 per 
cent during the first seven 
inonths of this year, the "China 
Mail" Jearned authoritatively yer. 
terday. 

Hadio 


receiving set’ Mcences 


taken out since the beginning of 


the year :totalled 24,030 yester. 
day, which fa 13,385 more than the 
whole of 1948) during . which 
10,645 Ileences were: {ssued. 


FOUR BRITONS. KILLED: 


Dutch Shoot Down 
Unarmed Dakota 


‘ Batavia, July 29. 
Indian, four Indonesians 
re killed when an ‘Indian 


Dakota plane was shot down: by two Dutch 


fighters today as-It 
airfield at Jogjaka 
lican capital. 


The plane, which belonged to Mr. 
into the village of 


crashed 

half miles sou 
flames, 

The Jokjakarata radio named 
these victims as: The pilot, former 
Wing-Commandet —Constan¥Vind, 
his wife, © ex-Squidron.Leader 
Hazelhurst, an Indian engineer, 
Mechanic Bidarin, atid four In. 
donesians, Mrs. Agi Sut}lpho, 
Abdul Rachmun. Saleh, Hadi 
Sumarno and Arifan Gani. The 
fourth Brilish. vidlim has not yet 


th of 


!peon Identified, 


The plane, whieh left Singapore 
cartier today, carrying two .tons 
of medien! supplies for the In. 
doneslan Red Cross, belonged ‘to 
Mr. B. Patnaik, personal friend of 
Jewaharlal Nehru, er 

The pilot, ex-Wing.Commander 
Constantine, was an unofielal 
civil avintion adviser to the In. 
coneslan Government, He: com. 


1 | manded a RAF, fighter squadron 


3 


2 1 
5 


» 8 
2 


BOWLS TITLE 
MATCHES - 


« Tha following amendments to 
the programme «of tha Open 
Singles ant’ Open -Pairs ‘Lawn’ 
Bowls; champlonship ure announ-* 


cod s:— 
Open Singles ._ 

August §:—H, F. Shiclda ¥, M. 
N, Rakusen (at Kowloon Decks), 

August 12:—C. H. Gough v,-3. 
Yusuf (at ILK.FG,), . 

. Open Pairs 

August T:--A, H, and U. A: 
Rumjaohn v. J, Gotlatl 
Collyer. (at ‘H.K-F.C.), 

August 11:—~A, E, 
B..W. Bradbury v. A 
Noronha: (at K.B.G.C,), . 

August 14:—A, V. Gosans and 
N.A.'Boltrao y. E, F, Popa and 
L. = Coombes “(at ..C.C,); 


“ GANADIAN’ AIR 
“t Honoliluyy July 

’ A Royal ; 
repeat carrying ."; Genéra) 


1 


July (29, | 


Tee 
the: dne..engs 
Preag 


{Canadian Air Force| d 


in {ndia during the war, 
Last week, the plane flew. Dr. 
Sutan Sjahrir, former Indonesian 


1! Prime Minister, from Jogjakarta 


to dndin through the Dutch alr 
blockade on the first stage of his 
world alr tour, appealing for ald 
for hts country, See J obs 
The Jogjakarta radlo, sald that 
the plane was coming into the 
airfleld with its under-corrlage 
alrendy lowered when it was at. 
tacked and shot down, - ; 
The-alreld was attacked twice 
todny by Dutch planes, . tonight's 
Indonesian army communique 
sald. ‘ : i 
The Jogjakarta “radio fater 
reported that the sole survivor 
was Abdu Gani, Socretary-Gen. 
eral of the Republican Informa. 
tion Ministry, ite 
The’ Indonesian . ‘Republican 


Government: has Issued a-spectot| 


scmmunique, expressing the deep. 


ly and L.A. | est sorrow and heartfelt sympathy 


with the fcmilies of {,ose who lost 


Contes and | their. lives.—-Renter, 
Foand J. Ev} 


. “No Report”. 

At Singapore, '-H." Chowtizer, 

Tepresentative for tho Interna- 

tlonal Red. Croag, ‘sald the Dakota 

reported shot down at Jogjakarta 
ine n3t sponsored” by. th Tate! 
nhtlonal ‘Red .Cross, | * ide, oS 

of’ the 


« Tho official” spokesman . 

Netherlands East Indies: Govorn- 
mont. in’, Batavia’ ‘sald .“ Dutch 
military headquarter, had’ ng ree 


rort of any plane. :be 
cavn at: Jorjakarta. 


was about to land in the 


rta, the Indonesian Repub- 


-B. Patnail, 
Wodjo, two and a 
Jogjakarta and burst into 


There was one survivor. 


fdentlfied erroncously us an’ In- 
donealan plane of Japanese make, 
{it way elaimediby the Dutch com-- 
munique which suggested that the 
incident‘ occurred because the Ru- 
publican nuthoritiexn were “guilty 
of culpable carcleasnoss,” 

Gen. Simon Spoor, Commander 
of the Dutch forces, sald he decp- 
ly_rogretted.the deaths. of.-thone- 
aboard the plane. which wax 
carrylne medical supplies, but no 
request fcr permission to fly into 
the area was received and 
plane was not marked with 
usual Red Cross ‘Identification. 

Gen, Spoor sald: “They sHonki 
havo followed tho international 
convention .. . We.could hava 
arranged for a safe conduct.” 

The communique said. Dutch 
pilots . mistakenly identified the 

lane ag Japanese two-engined 
bomber partly because a similar 
Republican alr force plane bomb- 
cd Semarang that morning.— 
United Press. ‘ ‘ 


Renee ei 


< ‘yesterday's Dakota, 


.... Singapore for burial, : 
“The Government of the Rep 


‘ the present circumst 
“services of ‘a ‘minis 


land,” the message t 


g|POLICE COMMISSIONER: 
[FIGURES OF EFFICIENCY 


“1: Police Commissioner Macintosh revealed at. a 


CAMERA REPAIRS 


all types. of 
CAMERAS, ENLARGERS & Pics 
" Workmanship guaranteed, 


O10 SUPPLY 10 tee owe st 


ASIA PH 


Press conference yesterday that there was a 
large increase in juvenile hawking offences 


during 1946, no less 


than 4,160 boys and 2,360 


girls, making a total of 6,520. juveniles ‘under 


‘21 years of age, being charged with such|‘SOVIPT RUSSIA 


offences. 

In addition two juveniles 
were charged with possession of 
ornns, Hix with serious narault, 
thirteen with common assault, 
eleven for burglary and house- 
breaking, 242 boys ‘and 8 ‘girla 
were cauttght for petty larceny, 
and no fewer than 82 boys and 
18 girls were in posseaston of 
stulen goods. 

One boy was charged 
manslaughter, : 

More boya were caught 
in Hong Kong than in Kowloon 
for serious offences, at 

It was largely a social pro- 
b'en, he sald, not belonging to 
Hong Kong alone. London re- 
ports reveal .26 percent more’ 
children between tho ages of 8 
and 19 arrested than before 
the war. The inerease .in of- 
fenders between the ages 22 and 
30-was. 80 percent, London re- 
ports the highest crime increaac 
in. the 10-year age group, the 
respective percentages being age| 
8 44%, 9 48%, age 8610 
GO“, aye 11 44%, : 
| _ It will thus be seen, said the 
; Police Commissioner, that as 
compared with London our pro- 
blem here is a minor one, but 
this does not mean it fa not 
serious one, deserving of the 
attention of right-thinking peo- 
ple, 


“with 


Crime Figures 

Dealing with the gencral pro- 
blem of crime tackling, Police 
Commisaioney MacIntosh  re- 
toerred to figures in the annual 
report of the Lonodn Mectropoli- 
tun Po'ico for 1946 and gaid 
‘Hong Kong did not show up too 
budlyin comparison. 

1n: 1938 Hong Kong with an 
catimated population of 1,400,- 
000 Had 11,388 serious crimes, 
‘or B'erimes per 1,000. 
‘For the i1-month period of 
1946; with an estimated popu'a- 
tion of 1,800,000 the figure was 
13,764 which gives a’ proportion 
ef rouchly 8 per 1,000, the same 
as before the war. . 

In: the London area, aa com- 
pared swith 1938, the year 1946 
showed 'an‘increase of 34% in 
serlous crimes, or a proportion 
of 16 to every 1,000, as agninst 
10 fn 1938, 3 

Crimes in Hong Kong worked 
ouc at & for every policeman in 
“1946, This- was ‘the figure “for 
London in 1930, but for 1946 it 
had Jumped to 9 or 10, so here 
again -.Hong Kong compared 
more favourably with London. 

Arrcuts per policeman are the 
same {n Hong Kong as in Lon. 
aon, namely two per man, 

In 1946 London recovered 


17.84 of property ato'en during |” 


‘the yoar. The Hong Kong figure 
In 25.4%, | : 

The following crime figures 
for the first quarter of the cur- 
rent year ending June 80, as 


to remove the victims: of 


disaster to. Batavia or 


public regrets that | in 


ances it does not: have the 


ter. of the’ Church of -- Eng- 


o-Mr. Mitcheson said and 


{turn fits into .a lon 


compnréed with Inst 
revealed +— 

3,802 reports as against an 
average Of 3.428 per quartet 
for 1946. Arrests were 1,637 
und 1,€17 respectively. 

72 reports of robbery werc 
made for the'first quarter of, 
1047 os: against og quarterly 
average of 164 In 1946, 

Comparative figures for bur- 
glary were 219 against 263: go- 
down and = store-breaking 34 
agatnst 104; murder 7 against 8. 

In addition 31 persons werc 
arrested for possession of arms, 
1.133 for petty larceny with re- 
covery of one-third of stolen 
;goods, Arrests of 33 out af 48 
for thefts on ships and wharves 
with nearly 60% recovery of 
stolen property. . : 


Strength Of Force 


Pollce - Commissioner MacIn- 
tosh’ “also gave figures of the 
European strength of the Force, 
In 1941, jn the supervising, 
Grades there were 295 a8 against 
43 locals in the same grate, 
making a total of 338 supcrvis- 
ing officers, Today there are 
244 Europeans and’ 108° locale. 
or:a total of 252 tn the same 
Rrade, However, not all the 
Europeans are on duty, 
are on leave, and actual 
Are onl, 


year were 
‘ 


there 
da 19a 
mak- 


ly 
Y¥ 218 Europeans gn 
ocals at present on duty, 
Ing. a total of 318, 

uropcan non-gazetted ofti- 
cers are belng gradually: reduc- 
a! to 200 with - compensating 
Increase tn the Gazetted officers 
and local inspectors. “The fina) 
tigures this year’ are most 
Ukely to 238 Eurn- 
beans and 128 locals, whtch -wil) 
provide a, totbl of 366 in the 

sory grade as. aga 

508 ntore the war. Sains 
ese’ figures show, said the 
Police Commissioner, that while 
the locals filled only one-sixth 
of the supervisory .Tank, they 
Now occupy more ‘than’ one. 
third of the total number, This 
iN accordante with 


the seucy 'H Becer 

c cy of training up lor 

formnly fake j over e tases 
erty a 

pormorly p rcd by Euro 


A number of the mihor port 
which hefore the war were tik 
ed by Europeans tn the Rergeant 
froup have passed or are nass~ 
ing to local Inspectors, and 
fome of these wilt later pass to 
N.C.0's. who are also being 
trained up for the Purpose, 


Organisation 
“Regarding the organtaat 
of tho Force.” continued 
missioner MacIntosh, 
started f 


fon 
Com- 
tom scratch of da 

‘atoh, we had o 
threefold problem on our Nand, 
One to improvise. to kecp fo- 
ing, one to avolve a short term 
planning programme which ‘in 
& term pro- 
gtammes over = five 
ears,” 
*  Durin 
the orgaritsation muat sult -that 
phase; and’ as that phase 
changes with the completion of 
plans and improvement of or- 
fenisation, we are able to re- 

in. man power. 


extending 


Questioned on Hon 
accident’ rates ag ead 
with . London's, 

Mée!ntosh 

Cuses were o| 

head of popu 

pards ser, 


niliions as 
782, also for’ t 


crime ind] 
the matter 


suggested that the appropriate last offices ‘of q 


; ‘the rites"of the Church of *E: 
.--/earried out in Batavia or. Singapore. . 


Ts stated that pending the re. 
celpt of a reply, ‘the Republic 
had given orders to embalm the, 
bodies, ae EE es : 
Lhe message: conveyed the Re: 

ublic’s “formal expression’ | of. 

leep, regret. and. sympathy . and 
sald that It would’ be grateful 
if (Mr, Mitcheson -,vould. convey 
its! expression! to: the families ‘of 


thoae concerned, =: 74. 
. Dutch :Edat ‘Indies Govern. 
mont spokesman refiised ‘to make, 


ngland could be 


repreacntative In Singapore -sal 

that he . was: approached ‘to 
sponsor the trip but was unable 
ito do go: because: he had-not, re- 


ceived . authdrlsation: from Gene-| to: th 


A: lator message, from Singa. 
pore‘ sald, that ‘there... was no 
offichhl knowledge 

‘fourth. “British 

‘Dakota ‘crash. 


ind one Tridian 
aeaty ‘onthe, crew ahd pasé 
t: oe 


ints fi 


the. public report direct 


five 
were take: 


NER’S| 


w the. planning phase,| 4 
here hitharto hug 


olice:- Station, at a 


Yt 
4 


Fruitless | 


Appeal To . 


Soviet. 
-, ‘JULY 29, 
APPEALED ‘TO! 
IN THE 
UNITED NATIONS ECONO- 
MIC AND SOCIAL COUNCII. | 
HERE TODAY TO BANISH '. 
DISTRUST AND.TO JOIN IN: 
THE MARSHALL PLAN FOR 
THE ‘ECONOMIC RECON. 


1 


FRANCE 


| STRUCTION OF ISUROPE, .. 


Discussing the report of .the . 
Kconomic — Comminaton for 
Europe, M. Georges Boris, of 
France, anid that) Franee «did 
not feel that the present situa. 
tion was, In any way, final. 

“We have stated repeatedfy 
that a’! doors are left open,” 
he added, He hoped that the 
stand taken by Russia “will not 
be strictly adhered to forever." 

“We hope thit thia attitude 
will . change, wher | distrust, 
‘which is at present playing such 
© large part, subsides,” he add- 
ed, a 
On the “delicate problem” of 
German economy, he said, the. 
setting up of Europe on its 
fect again. depended to a cers 
tain extent on German recovery, 

European and German econo- 
mic problems must be tackled 
a8 a whole. Priority to Ger-” 
man reconstruction would — be 
‘Gnadmissable and unbearable", 


us some| iit on the other hand it would. © 


bo cqua'ly ‘dangerous to allow . 


Germany to remain in the heart 


of Europe with diversed. ccono- t 


mic ‘conditions which would be 
allowed to spread, 

The Soviet delegate, Profes- 
sor Alexander Morozov, in hia 
speech, made . only this com- 
‘mont on the French statement: 
“Some delegates have mention. 
ed the Margha'l plan. The So- 
viet position on thi plan wad, 
stated hy M. Molotov in Parts,” 
~Reutor, : 


In Other | 
What?.. . 


Shanghal, J uty 30. 


“The UNRRA Far East Coun." | 


ci} in, Washington has recom: 
mended to the UNRRA China 


piles be distributed north ‘of the, 
“34th parallel as a resu't of the 
Chinese Governmunt’s b'ockado: 
of Communist ports in violation: 
of ‘tie plulge to-allow non. 
partisan distribution of UNRRA| 
supplies in’ China, the Ameri-: 
can-owned “Shanghai  fvening 
Post and Mercury” ryported to- 


ay, ‘ ek 

Tf tho report is true—UNRRA 
received no. 
official information on the ro- 
cammendation—it means ‘that, 
alt of North China and) Man- 
churla will in. future be ux-* 
cluded from UNRRA supplies, 
The report. added thut jt un- 


with tho ex- 

hable goods, 

oda and: fertilisers, : 

wi'l be gent’ to - South 

H and ‘Formosa, ‘will be 

withheld from distribution un- 
wil clther the National Govern-, 
ment lifts its anti-Communist’ . 

or tho Wasliington 
verses the presont de- 


Dutch Tra 


In. Britain 


‘being trained’ in | - 
‘4 steps .would ba 
is) 
‘pending . the: ‘cassation 
s An th Datch 


~~. -Oficu: that-no-further: relief sup-— 


‘y 


t: arrangement ~ 


