The Chargé in China (Robertson) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/1–1246
 
[Document 34]
The Chargé in China
 (
Robertson
) 
to the Secretary of State
 
 
No. 1041
 
Chungking
, January 12, 1946.
[Received January 30.]
 
 
Sir
: I have the honor to enclose a copy of a memorandum under date of January 12, 1946, regarding the National Democratic Reconstruction Association, which was prepared by the Embassy for submission to General Marshall. Attached to the memorandum are a list of the representatives of the Association who are scheduled to call on General Marshall and the Organic Principles of the organization.
 
Organization of the Association during December is believed to be typical of the increased political efforts of various groups in China recently, who see in the present situation an opportunity of making their voices heard in the effort to break the monopoly of the Kuomintang. Some of the organizations apparently have their own “axe to grind”, but this Association is felt to be one of the most respectable and honest in its aims.
 
Respectfully yours,
 
For the Chargé d’Affaires a. i.:
Robert
 L. 
Smyth
 
Counselor of Embassy
 
 
 
[Enclosure]
 
 
Memorandum by the Second Secretary of Embassy in China
 (
Sprouse
)
 
 
[
Chungking
,] January 12, 1946.
 
 
Enclosed is a list of the members of the delegation of the National Democratic Reconstruction Association who will call on General Marshall on Monday, January 14, at 10:00 a.m., together with a brief statement of their background. Also enclosed is a statement of the “Organic Principles” of the Association.
89
 
 
The local press announced on December 17, 1945, that the inaugural meeting of the Association was held on December 16 and that this meeting was attended by over 100 educators, cultural workers and industrialists. According to a member of the Presidium of the Association, membership in the organization is limited to non-party and professional men. It is reported by the press that the Association contemplates drawing up a plan of an industrial area which will govern the relationship between capital and labor and the management 
of factories and that it wishes to establish a model for new industries in China.
 
Of the members of the delegation which will call on General Marshall one (Huang Yen-pei) is the leader of the Vocational Education Association, one of the minority groups in the Democratic League, and another (Sung Chi-meng) is the General Secretary of the Vocational Education Association. It is believed that the Democratic Reconstruction Association maintains close contact with the Democratic League although a reliable, well-informed non-party Chinese states that it is not connected with the League in any way. A member of the Association (with a reputation for great honesty) has informed me that the organization is intended for those “engaged in protective businesses and interested in national affairs”. He adds that beyond a desire to be vocal on matters affecting the welfare of China as a modern democratic nation and to reflect public opinion the Association has no other motive.
 
Philip
 D. 
Sprouse
 
 
89
 
Enclosures not printed.