Draft Prepared by General Marshall for the Immediate Cessation of Hostilities in Manchuria
 
Marshall Mission Files, Lot 54–D270
 
[Document 423]
Draft Prepared by General Marshall for the Immediate Cessation of Hostilities in Manchuria
32
 
 
 
[
Chungking
, April 28, 1946.]
 
 
We, the Committee of Three, have reached the following agreement regarding the Manchurian situation, with the approval of Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek and Chairman Mao Tse-tung: 
 
a
. The terms of the Cease Fire agreement of 10 January 1946 apply to Manchuria except as specifically modified hereinafter.
 
b
. Orders will immediately be issued by the National Government and the headquarters of the Communist forces to their military commanders in Manchuria to bring to an end all fighting and firing within twenty-four hours of the signing of this agreement.
 
c
. The troops now in hostile contact will withdraw each 30 li in rear of their positions at the time of receipt of these instructions.
 
d
. All troop movements will cease except: 
 
(1) As provided in 
c
 above, and
 
(2) As are involved in the sea movement of the 60th and 93rd Armies, or
 
(3) Are agreed upon by the Committee of Three for the purpose of facilitating supply, shelter or control.
 
 
e
. The railways included in the Sino-Soviet treaty will immediately resume operation under the present direction.
 
f
. A commission consisting of the following individuals will proceed at once to Manchuria: 
 
Chang Kia-ngau
33
 Chairman
 
General Chou En-lai
 
Mo Te-hui
34
 
 
 
 
This commission will investigate the situation and conditions in Manchuria and will submit recommendations to the National Government regarding the following matters: 
 
(1) Redisposition of the military forces.
 
(2) Restoration of communications.
 
(3) Organization of the present political and economic councils and the political organization and administration of provincial governments and cities.
 
 
In its recommendations the commission will consider interim measures to reestablish peace and an early return to normal conditions, as 
well as measures for a permanent establishment of domestic affairs. It is authorized, in its discretion, to submit its recommendations piecemeal while reaching an agreement on all matters concerned.
 
32
 
Marginal notation by General Marshall: “Submitted to Gimo but not accepted. Part 
f
 submitted as proposal of Democratic League, which had been checked by them with Chou En-lai.”
33
 
Chairman of the economic commission of Generalissimo Chiang’s Headquarters in Manchuria.
34
 
Member of presidium of People’s Political Council.