Memorandum by General Chou En-lai to General Marshall
 
Marshall Mission Files, Lot 54–D270
 
[Document 430]
Memorandum by General Chou En-lai to General Marshall
 
 
Nanking
, May 4, 1946.
 
 
My Dear General Marshall
: I learned that the spokesman of Generalissimo’s Headquarters in Sian has released a statement to the Central News at 1700, May 1, 1946, on arrival of Generalissimo at that city. I wish to point out that there are three points in that statement which do not conform with the true facts: 
 
a
. On April 29, 1946, the eve of your departure, you communicated to me the views of Generalissimo that (1) the proposal of the Democratic League
39
 being unacceptable to him; and (2) the cessation of hostilities being dependent upon the evacuation of Communist troops from Changchun and the occupation by Government troops. As far as I understood, you merely presented the above as the views of Generalissimo, without stating this being yours. Therefore, it appears to me that the spokesman quoting you as having proposed that “at this moment the Communist troops should evacuate Changchun, for the purpose of having the city taken over by the Central troops, before everything else can be negotiated upon” is telling something which is not in conformity with facts.
 
b
. The spokesman’s allegation, that the “Government has never rejected any proposal” also does not correspond to truth. As a matter of fact, the Government rejected the proposal of the Democratic League, as well as your four-point proposal,
40
 which is principally acceptable to us, but not to the Government.
 
c
. On our part, we never raised any other claim except the consistent desire for an unconditional truce. Whereas we are firmly upholding the March 27 Agreement, the Government has violated it.
 
 
In view of the above, the spokesman’s statement released on day of Generalissimo’s arrival and disseminated by the Central News all over China and abroad appears to be inconsistent with the true facts. While expressing my regret over this statement I wish to draw your attention to this matter.
 
[Signature in Chinese]
(
Chou En-lai
)
 
39
 
Not found in Department files.
40
 
April 23, p. 792 
[
Pg. 792 includes portions of 
Doc. 414
 and 
Doc. 415
]
.