The Counselor of Embassy in China (Smyth) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/6–346: Telegram
 
[Document 501]
The Counselor of Embassy in China
 (
Smyth
) 
to the Secretary of State
 
 
Nanking
, June 3, 1946—3 p.m. 
[Received June 4—11:26 a.m.]
 
 
907. Political attacks on Kmt were intensified in Yenan broadcasts for week ending May 31 as situation became more critical in Manchuria with Nationalists capture of Changchun and continued advances northward. One broadcast carried long appeal from Democratic League for cessation of hostilities as sole means of preserving China from disaster. Appeal also demanded cessation of “double-faced U. S. policy” of furnishing arms to Kmt which no longer has any excuse for taking over Manchuria now that Soviet troops have withdrawn. Another item said Communist withdrawal from Changchun was done not from lack of strength but to test Kmt sincerity on stopping hostilities. Also reported that numerous groups in liberated areas appeal for cessation of fighting, stoppage of American arms delivery to Kmt for civil war purposes, and forcing Kmt to live up to commitments. Other items reported growing concern in independent papers over Kmt advances Manchuria; thousands students fleeing to Communist areas to escape inflation, possible starvation 
and Kmt terror and regimentation in all schools; and a long story by a former student in Sino-American Special Service Training School in Fukien (Tai Li) on methods of training, courses followed, and indoctrination for extermination of Communists.
 
One broadcast quoted in full captured order to Kmt troops to begin attacking in east Hopei May 30 for purpose destroying Communists that area and cutting their lines to Manchuria. Item May 31 cited few attacks which it charged were preliminary to all-out attack.
 
Several items recounted closing of Peiping 
Emancipation Daily
 and New China News Agency May 29 by Kmt order. Paper had largest circulation any paper Peiping-Tientsin. Yenan 
Emancipation Daily
 editorial charged action desperate move by Kmt to forestall its deteriorating position in all China, is linked with similar actions against other papers elsewhere, and is in line with Kmt Fascist techniques of oppression people of China. Another item reported three waves of peasant revolts, involving hundreds of thousands in north Chekiang since Jan. against oppression and extortion by Kmt officials, mostly ex-collaborators.
 
Economic items: Call made for bumper crops in liberated areas; 500,000 acres formerly dry land now being irrigated. 8,000 mile mail network established in liberated areas, now isolated from mail service in Kmt areas. Kmt rule, according to long article, has ruined Formosa economically. Another long article details growing economic prosperity in port of Antung under Communist leadership. Relief for Kiangsi–Anhwei border area came unexpectedly from bean and wheat harvest and Govt, relief contributions. Relief needed [badly?] in Chahar. Flood control, irrigation and reforestation work in north China since Jap surrender have saved 5 million acres from drought and flood dangers.
 
Dept. please repeat Moscow.
 
Smyth