General Marshall to President Truman
 
Marshall Mission Files, Lot 54–D270: Telegram
 
[Document 507]
General Marshall to President Truman
95
 
 
 
Nanking
, 5 June 1946.
 
 
828. 
Dear Mr. President
: Since my message of May 26, 776, following has transpired. On May 28 Generalissimo sent me from Mukden a letter received the 30th largely repeating terms dictated in previous letter of May 24 but agreeing to my qualifications regarding power of decision of Americans, also stating that as to the method of recovering sovereignty in Manchuria Government could not abandon the taking over administration of any area but might agree to send forward, after military advances had ceased, only administrative officials and such military and police forces as would be absolutely necessary for the maintenance of local order and communications. Also he explained use of word guarantee in reference to me as meaning that in regard to all agreements in which I have participated in signing that I would set time limits for the putting into effect of such agreements and would assume the responsibility of supervision over the strict observance of such agreements on the part of the Communists. Incidentally, to what follows I have made no reference to this matter of guarantee in my negotiations with Generalissimo.
 
Not having received the foregoing letter on the 29th, I had Dr. T. V. Soong transmit the following message from me to the Generalissimo in Mukden.
 
[Here follows text as quoted in General Marshall’s memorandum of May 29 to Dr. Soong, printed on page 912 
[
Pg. 912 includes portions of 
Doc. 487
, 
Doc. 488
, and 
Doc. 489
]
.]
 
No reply to the foregoing message having been received on May 31st I had the following message dispatched to Generalissimo in Peking where he had just arrived.
 
[Here follows text quoted in General Marshall’s telegram No. 804, May 31, to Mr. Walter S. Robertson, printed on page 926 
[
Pg. 926 includes portions of 
Doc. 491
 and 
Doc. 492
]
.]
 
This message was sent direct by me to our American Commissioner of Executive Headquarters in Peking Walter Robertson and also through Dr. T. V. Soong. Incidentally it developed that my previous message of May 29th had missed the Generalissimo in Mukden and was therefore long delayed in delivery.
 
 
Robertson on June 1st sent me the following from Generalissimo:
 
[Here follows text quoted in telegram No. 3371, June 1, printed on page 930 
[
Pg. 930 includes portions of 
Doc. 494
 and 
Doc. 495
]
.]
 
During the foregoing period I had continued lengthy conferences with Chou En-lai, Communist representative, including one from 10 a.m. until 4 p.m. Also lengthy meetings with Dr. Soong, representatives of Democratic League, Young China Party, a representative committee from 500 delegates to National Assembly and many others.
 
Generalissimo returned day before yesterday evening and I had a 3-hour conference with him yesterday morning. The following developed: 
 
A. A misunderstanding on his part caused by a mistranslation had blocked the immediate establishment of the advanced section of Executive Headquarters in Changchun. I immediately directed its establishment.
 
B. The Generalissimo agrees to issue an order to his armies in Manchuria to cease advances, attacks or pursuits (in other words, aggressive action) for a period of 10 days to afford the Communist[s] an opportunity to prove their sincerity by completing negotiations with the Government during that period on the following points. 
 
1. Detailed arrangements to govern a complete termination of hostilities in Manchuria.
 
2. Definite detailed arrangements, with time limits, for the complete resumption of communications in North China.
 
3. A basis for carrying out without further delay the agreement of February 25 for reorganization of armies.
 
 
 He first stipulated one week in which to complete these negotiations, but I insisted that would be impossible. He finally agreed to a period of 10 days. He stated to me, most confidentially, that this would be his final effort at doing business with the Communists, that the present indeterminate situation with communications blocked, coal barely obtainable in sufficient quantities, cities starving could not be endured economically or otherwise, that all-out war would be preferable.
 
 
I saw Chou En-lai yesterday afternoon, first having sent him a memorandum of the Generalissimo’s terms. Chou immediately asked for an extension of the 10 days to 1 month but finally reduced his request to 15 days which in my opinion is not unreasonable as there are many complicated plans to be agreed to and he must fly to Yenan at least once and to Manchuria for conferences. Dr. Soong called later and discussed details regarding communications in which he is vitally interested. I already had an American Army engineer, who heads the communications reestablishment activity of Executive Headquarters, in conference yesterday with the Minister of Communications.
 
 
I will see Generalissimo early this afternoon regarding extension of time to 15 days.
 
The following factors have been involved most in the foregoing:
 
The prolonged absence of Generalissimo created a serious doubt in the minds of Communist leaders regarding impartiality of my attitude, accentuated by a lively propaganda against U. S. support of Government Armies, etc. The Generalissimo’s insistence at the same time that American officers should be given the deciding vote in all cases of Communist–Government representative disagreements, added to these suspicions and the delicacy of my position. I can ride through these difficulties, I think.
 
For your information, but I hope not for press release, our Naval vessels or other American Flag shipping are no longer engaged in transporting either Chinese Government troops or military supplies, this work now being carried out by Liberty ships with Chinese crews under special flag until sale negotiations are completed and by Chinese-manned LST’s in process of turnover to Chinese Navy. We may give some help to the transport of a Chinese Division to Japan. I want no press release on this because I do not wish to tie my hands or to appear to be pushed into a defensive attitude of explanation. Furthermore, the Communist leaders know the facts and are surprised and somewhat apologetic.
 
Question regarding American powers of final decision has been left to direct negotiation between Government and. Communists without reference to me.
 
Finally, as matters now stand solution awaits Generalissimo’s agreement or refusal to extend time to 15 days and Chou En-lai’s obtaining commitments or instructions from Yenan. I will advise you tonight or tomorrow of progress.
 
95
 
Copy delivered to the Secretary of State.