Minutes of Conference Between General Marshall and Dr. Lo Lung-chi and Dr. Carsun Chang, at General Marshall’s House, June 21, 1946, 8:20 a.m.
 
Marshall Mission Files, Lot 54–D270
 
[Document 579]
Minutes of Conference Between General Marshall and Dr. Lo Lung-chi and Dr. Carsun Chang, at General Marshall’s House, June 21, 1946, 8:20 a.m.
 
 June 21, 1946, 8:20 a.m. 
 
 
 
Also present:
 
Captain Soong
 
 
 
Dr. Lo stated that he and Dr. Chang had suggested to Gen. Chou that he consider giving the American team member final authority to conduct local investigations. Regarding this Gen. Chou had wired Yenan and the reply came back last evening which approved the American team member to have the power to decide where and when the team was to go. He further stated that members of minority parties met the Government delegates yesterday and asked the Government to extend the 15 day truce. Dr. Chang said that Gen. Chou told them that the Communist Party was willing to give the final authority to American team members in ordering cease fire. General Marshall said that he could not quite understand what Gen. Chou meant by Americans’ final decision in ordering cease fire. For instance, when fire was ceased, what should be done to prevent further fighting? Dr. Chang stated General Chou’s implied meaning would be that the American team members would have power to decide what distance each side would have to withdraw. Gen. Marshall then said that it was not sufficient to merely imply because the lower ranks among the Communist Party would not adhere to this implication. Gen. Marshall said that Gen. Chou had been reluctant in this matter because the lower ranks among the Communist Party could not analyze the situation as to why Government troops were using American equipment—guns, bombs, etc., and that they all looked upon Americans with disfavor.
 
Dr. Lo said that Gen. Marshall’s arbitration power on the Committee of Three level was another deadlock issue. Gen. Marshall said he saw no particular reason why such an arrangement would not be appropriate in Executive Headquarters and in the Field teams but that on the Committee of Three level unanimous vote proceedings would have to continue with the possible exception of rulings on interpretations of directives and agreements. He could not accept the arbitration power as proposed by the Government because it would impose too much responsibility upon the U. S. Government. The Government insisted on it since they wanted to insure that agreements would be carried out and since the existing procedure was wholly ineffective.
 
Dr. Lo then said that they would be glad to go to see Gen. Chou this morning regarding what Gen. Marshall had just said. However, 
Gen. Marshall replied that Gen. Chou was coming to see him 1100 hours this morning and he suggested that they wait.