{LET us PHOTOGRAPH YOUR 
| WEDDING | 


' FRANCIS WU'SSTUDIO ’ 
GLOUCESTER ARCADE ; 


KOWLOON 


Palestine 
Hotel 
Tragedy 


Jerusalem, Jan, 5. 

Twenty persons were kill- 
ed, including the Spanish 
Mice-Consul’ Manuel Allen 
da Salazar, when Jewish 
underground fighters blew 
up the Semiramis Villa 
‘Hotel in the. Modern Kata- 
mo quarters of Jerusalem 
today, 


Three badies were recovered from 
the detirin and 17 are still buried 
under tons of maninary as British 
Royal Engineers, working with bull- 
dozera and acctyless torches, probed 
the wreckage of the three-store build: 
Inge. 

The police believed the explosives 
were planted at the side of the hotel 
and detonated by a hand grenade 
thrown frum a speeding car at about 
1 am. 


The dead included six membern of 


snatch the revolver 
(Commanding Police 
New Territories). 


Another — allegedly 
to hur] atone at the Police.’ Both 
were seen in time and were 
arrested. 


The only mishap during the 
day’sa evictlon of the illegal 
residents and demolishing of 
the Lorenzo Christian Arah family | structures occurred when one of 
‘the father, mother, sun, daughter and {the PWD coolies — 47-year-old 
(wo cousins, “One son survived with | Chingg Sin — fell from the 
minor injuries, upper floor of a wooden 
Rescuers working throughout the structure, 
, Might were handicapped by torrential He was acnt 
rains and high winds, : 
Heavy shunting. followed the ex. | Hospital. 
plosion nud the body of an Arab war 
found killed by oa bullet near the 
hotel. 


tw Kowloon 


‘Prevented Damage 


Semiramiv ix located 200 yards Reulising that the Govern. 
from the gate to the British security| ment = meant business, the 
zone "Hand in the neighbourhood | majority of the people affected 
Where four Arab houses were bumb-{ by the eviction order dismantled 
ed Inet week, their own atructures to save the 

There wax na iniication which material and prevent damage to 
Jewish organisation carried out the thelr personal property, 
we hS Spanish consul wan a 29-year- By e pa aoe pence 
old bachelor and (a kinsman of Vise, than 20 of the 5 structures 
comme de ‘Tapia ‘and, the Duke of | “Ere dismantled ant removed. 
Alba—United Press, The work wil} continue today 

Si under the supervision of the 
PEDRDINSNN PN RG ere Ab Police. 

‘Student’s Bod _ | sistance was the Vice-chairman 
of the so-valled “Kowloon City 

Residents Association", Lau 

Ngai-fat. . 

When the Police party, head- 
ed by Acting Police Commis- 


‘Found 
In Playground aloner W. la B. Sparrow and 
Mr. H. W. E. Heath reached 


Early yesterday morning the® the first row of illegal sheds, 
dead body of a student-boarder | Lau ‘allegally tried to pick up 
at the 8t. Paul's College (Mo- stones to hurl atthe Police. 
penal Joad) wae found in the) He was promptly grabbed by 

al playground. Chief Inapdctor Simpson and 
Deceased was identified ax Shun Sub-Inspector MacDonald (hott 
Hon-hung, an overseas Chinese from| Of Kowloon City Police Station) 
America, who joined the college last] and marched off to the Police 
year. : van, ? 

Police, saying that there wae “no| Chu Pul-tong, Chairman of 
foul play," suspected that the 2t-year-| the Association, attempted to 
old boy had fallen feom the 20-foot| assist his henchman’ but was 
wall bordering the playground, held by Mr. Heath. | 


QUEEN OF GREECE WILL 
_ VISIT “FRONT LINE” 


: ; Athens, Jan, 4. 
Queen Friderika, of Greece, landed today at 
Prevoza, on the east coast of Greece, from a 
Te and was eepected later today at 
Yawn capital of Epirus, on her way to 
Konitza, battle area of northern Greece, the 
thens news agenoy reported. 


Greek troops in the area were ‘to- 
“day still attacking the guerillas, who 
failed to take Konia, near the Al- 

jan fronticr, last week, the ageacy 


; Supported by aircraft, whleb at- 
tacked guerilla batteries shelling the 
“town yesterday, they were enlarging 
the perimeter they held round the 
town, - 2 F 

George Stratos, Greek War Minte- 
Asr, told: reporters io Salonika that 
reign stall officers directed the’ at 
tack on: Konitza. : 
-The report of the inquiry team.of 


ee of the Comminsion within twa 
days, Greck press reports froin 
Salonike sald today. : 
| The posting of “groups of observers 
on—bebalf—of-the—-commission— along 
Greece’s northern frontiern would be= 
gin this week, according to there 
teporta. =. 
- The first would be statloned ‘in 
Eplrus and would consiat of military 
members of the commission with 
Greek Halvon officers, 

Dr, Constantin Tealdaris, Greck 
Vicc-Premier: and Foreign ter, 


I : ict that 
‘the Unleed Nations Balkan Commis. whatever" may, happen’ in ise 


alon, which Visited the fightlog ares, | "Greece ted ined to. pursue her 
“WHI be. plated before the ‘aub-cota-| mission not aoa small state In a cor- 
Gy : : - " ‘her of Europe, but’ as important 
: ON: OTHER PAG factor. in world ‘politles.” . 
—— : rticle~adde—that~-1948—“wilF 
P 7 ea a ae aes etitical” year, : full of eves 


Page Two: : [be 
i . : J which will decide the {ate not only 
lainan “War Srinss Telal, °: of. Eu * bue also of tho’ cathe 


¢ ° Page Three. wk 
ae Faco Skel 
. 


ee 


|. ESTABLISHED ‘FOR ‘OVER’ 


No. 33863. Ee 


attempted * 


The firs! to attempt any re-|: 


the -Police party, 


| file,” with the B.U 


LUUN EVICTION SUCCEEDS 
Only Two Attempts At Interference 

Hut Owners. Pull « 
Down Own Dwellings | 


Except for two attempts at interference by 
two men, the eviction order against more 
than 1,000 unauthorised occupiers of 
Crown Land within the old walled Kow- 
loon City was carried out yesterday 
der the supervision of 250 Police b 
some 40 PWD coolies. 


One of the leaders of the “Po On Kowloon City 
Residents Association” allegedly attempted ‘to 


of Mr. H. W. E. Heath, 
Officer for Kowloon and 


He allegedly made an grab at 
the Commanding Officer's —_re- 
volver, Det.-Inspéctor Siu 
Chung-yin, standing nearly, 
appted) his riottruncheon -fo 
Chu’s koucktles. 


Chu was handcuffed on the 


spet and escorted by two detee- 7 
tiven to the Police yan, 


i Shouts 


Both the leaders of the resis- 


tance movement shouted abuser |. 


and defiance at the Pollee und 
called upon their compatrioty tu 
“stand up for, the rights of the 
Chinese Republic,” 


Their “rallying cries’, like 
those made before tho arrival of 
the Police and demolition squad 
fell upon deaf cars, 


After the  exezedingly — brief 
“skirmish”, Mr. Heath and C. I 
Simpson made the- round of the 
sheds calling upon the tenants 
to remove all thelr furniture 
and personal belongings, + 


This was completed by- 7.10 
am., and within five minutes 
the first shed. was "Invaded” by 
Land Balliff S, A, Fowler and 
a number of coolleg recrulted by 
the P.W.D. 

Rv 9 am, only foot-high stone 
walla marked the  sitea where 


+the .our illegal sheds had been. 


Piles of planks and wooden 
poles and heaps of stone blocks 
were all that remained of the 
woolen structures which, up te 
carly Sunduy morning, housed 
four weaving factories. 


Dawn Scene 


When the “China Mail" ra- 
porter arrived outside the Police 
Station at 5.45°a.m., approxi- 
mately ten Police vehicles nnd 
two ambulances were parked 
along Boundry Street. 

Standing in front of the gates 
wero. Commanding Officer 
Health, Div-Supts, Charles Mot- 
tram.. (Kowloon City .and 
George Leys (Yaumati), Chief 
Inspectors J.F. Clarke, F.T. 
Portallion and Simpson, Det- 
Inspectors Slu Chung-yin’ and 
Fung,’ anq Det-Sgt, Tao Ying. 

Inside the Station compound 
were a “battalicn" of stecl-hel- 
meted constables carrying their 
gas-maosks, riot batons and 
wicker shiclds, 

At 6.15 o.m. the gathered 
vehicles were added to by two 
trucklonds of Kowloon Emer- 
gency Unit personnel undor the 
command of Sub-Inapector Wall. 

Within five minutes of the ar- 
wival of the P.W.D. lorries (with 
about forty coolics) at 6.40 a.m. 
numbering 
approximately 260 strong, 
boarded their vehicles, | 

Final orders were given by 
Acting - Polico 
Sparrow, who wan accompanied 
by Mr. LHC. Calthrop, DCP, 
and’ the “invasion” began at 
7am, sharp. Tho point of at- 
tack. was the South Gate of 
Kowloon City. aon . 
* The Police, Ied by a Kowloon 
City contigent, marched ; single 


carrying “Disperse 6 : 
atid “Tear Gas” notice boards. ‘. 
; Many of .tho inhabitants, “ap- 
ronched: by the’ “China Mall" 
in ‘the “afternoon. atatsd . that 
Me “alterpative 
farthor Gast, at 
ital, payable 


Commissioner | w, 


._ HONG KONG, TUESDAY, JANUARY 6, 1948... 


Pe ‘ 


Photo shows a gang of coolies engaged in the taxk 
sheds at Kowloon Walled City yesterday. 


Army Sets 
Alsatian 
DogWatch\ 


Headquarters, Land Forces, 
announces that a number 
of Alsatian watch dogs will 
be arriving ‘{n Hong _Konk 
in mid January and will be - 
used inside the Military 
stores area at Shamshuipo, 
Kowloon. 

Thes* animals have proved 
highly successful) in Burma 
againnt thleves breaking 
protected areas. : 

They are handled by British 
soldiers and are kept on a leash 
until they pick up a scent or 
hear anyone moving inside thelr 
beat. . 

On being released they attack 
the would-be thicf inside their 
down until called. off by the 
handler. ; 

Thieves cutting holes in the 
perimeter fencing will expose 
themselves to be attacked by 
these animals, which will, if 
necessary, follow them out 
through the: hole until caught or 
called off. - t 


es of 
LS niles west” 
y. 


into 


lief that the Communists -might 
attempt to penetrate into Hunan 
Province as large Red shipping 
concentrations have ‘been scen 
in upper Yangtae. 

Meanwhile, Communist Gen- 
eral Liu Po Cheng is reported 
to be ready to launch diver- 
sionary attacks in varlous parts 
of Hupeh, while his main Yorce. 
encircled in tho Tapiehshan 
mountain: range on the border 
of Honan, Anhwel and Hupeh 
provinces, attempts a |reakont. 

In central Hopei, the situa- 
tion around Pacting, the pro- 
vinclal capital, has eased con. 


Shanghai Prices, Take 
A Rapid Swoop Up 


au Shanghai, Jan. 5. 

All prices soared today as the commodity stock . markets 
reopened after a five-day New Yenr holiday with the retail 
prico of rice setting 2 new high of CNS1,400,000 for one plcul 
{approximately 100 pounds). We : : 

The U.S. dollar black market(CN$165,000 to one but closed 
rate touched the day's high off Jower at’CN$162,000 although 
Oo ——nnnm——== | the official open market rate waz 
unchanged at ‘CN$89,000 to one 
U.S. (dollar. 24 : 


The sodden: depreciation of 
the Chinese dollar was declared 
to-be the immediate result of an 
: influx. of: ‘surplus: capital from 

: the “fnterior “of China which 

A eal . ~ Virtually ‘nullified’ the Goyern- 
PP : | bankg” efforts to create ao tight 
Shanghai, Jan. 5, | Money, ‘condition by. refusing 

An urgent appeal. to Premier | tows loans * gnd collecting: -old 
Gene ta ke ne the eammes creed SR ae a 
ste a 8 rans’ Cer wy 
of rico was nent today’ oy, the} Due to ‘tho. aitractive black 
Mayor of Shanghal,.-BMr. K..C.| market ‘interest rate. which is ag 
high as 27 to'30 per cent month- 

hillliong” after’ . millions of 
durplis capital reached Shang- 
bal enabling tec tO. Tes 
atime. speculation, hoarding and 


Mayor’s 
Urgent 


Meo : 
*, Wu asked the Premier, to or- 
der Governor Wang Mu-kung of 
Kiangsu provinge, chief produc- 
ing atea in this’ part of China, 
to suppress the sdaring | costs 


membors | { 
fire” 


ONE HUNDRED YEARS’ 


Large Communist forces have cro: 


Tho reports expressed the be-| 


. 7 e 


s \ 


’ Price: 


Eviction | Background | 
A Flash Of 
Early Morning Moments 


Yesterday’s 


ie 


of demolishing some of the Megal 


Chinese Reds 
Drive On - 


Across Yangtze | 


Nanking, Jan..5.. 
. the upper 


: the Yangtse River near Lui .Yieh-. 
Jeg ov; a town-23 snfles West of the portaf Shast, 
we 6 nkow, according ‘td pro- 
Government dispatches reaching "Nanking 


siderably us a result of. Govern- 
ment -troops’ success In alearing 
the Paoting-Peiping railway. 


Astride « 


The Communists astride this 
section fled, to the west when 
caught in a pincer. movement by 
a Nationalist column | pushing 
down, the Une from Petptng ana 
another moving up:from the 
Pasting area. d 

In Manchuria, they have inten- 
sified: their mopping ‘up opera- 
tions with the advent of milder 
weathtr. For the first time in 
«ver two months, the tempera- 
ture in Mukden today roge above 
treezing point to. the joy of ite 
fuel-short 600,000 inhabitants. 

The present lull on the Man- 
ehurla front, however, is expect- 
ed to be short-lived. According 
to usually reliahle Chinere 
sources reaching Shanghai, con. 
siderable Communist troops 
movements... are-{n progress in 
several sectors, notably. around 
Changchun and d@ ‘both sides of 
the Pelping-Mukden fallway in 
southwestern Matichuria, 

It is belisved that {n tho next 
phase of thelr’ ‘offensive, the 
Communist might Jnunch an all- 
out effort to, take | Changchun, 
whose garrison consisty mostly 
of the Amorican trained and. 


American ‘equipped New” First], 


Army. cra 
' “‘Chiang Speaks. - 
Meanwhile, in’ i. Nanking, 
Chiang “Kal-shek -doclared * that. 
the Kuomintang, is in no ‘dangor 
of foundering dnd the present 
government {s quite safe'in spite 
of all: predictions to the ; con- 
trary. 0s a , 
’ Speaking at the weekly Kuo- 
mintang memorial ‘sorvice, Pre- 
sfdent Chiang: calléd on“Party 
membors : to: work: harder for 
unity and ‘to refrain'from heed- 
ing Communist: propaganda. : 
“The echevaneats “ot. 


“Jed 


‘20 Centr, - 


- Democrati 


‘YPEWRITERS: | 


_ | * GALOULATING MACHINES ° 
, also Anythidg and ‘Everything 
" -, «for OFFICE MACHINES 

. Excellent Service. 


3, D’Aguilar 8t. ee , Tel. 21433 


‘ . 

The Central Executive Committee of the China 
Democratic | e, which .was ‘declared 
illegal by a Chinese Central Government 
spokesman in November last, yesterday decid- 
ed to re-establish the League’s headquarters 
in Hong Kong. eer edt ‘ 

At yesterday's opening meeting of the League's 
Third Plenary Session, the more than 50 par- 
ticipating members strongly denounced the 
Nanking Government's “unreasonable and 
fanatic” illegalisation of the League. 

Under the Chairmanship of } members on Noyember 6, 1947) 
74-ycar-old Shen Chun-jn, Jend- | without it belng Jogally pnased 
“ry of the National Salvation | by the League. : . 
Group, ung vice--Chairmanship}| "Acting according to the 
af Chang Po-chun, leader of the| Lengue’s Conatitution, we are 
-Peneants and Workers Party,|metting here in’ Hong Kong to 
the meeting. declared that  it}recstabiish our Headquarters 
“camnot accept the  disxsclution and to decide on new policies for 
unnouncement, made  under|the future. 
oressure, coercion and threats « Declaration - 
of kidnapping, by some mem-|' ‘Wo tnke this opptrtunity to 
bera of the Standing Committee [declare the following: 
of the China Demorratic! “The China Democratic Lene 
League” since the dissolution | yue, representing. the will of tho 
order had not been Iegally pass. | masaes, has since its foundation, 
ed by the League. : beon fighting courageously for 

A statement issued after the]/China’s democracy, peace, inde- 
meeting reads :— Mendence and unify.’ - . 

The Statement Reads “The Nanking  Dictatorial 

“We members of the Chinn| Government by. destroying the 
Democratic League, én the'open | PCC (Political, Consultative 
Ing day of ‘our fhird Plenary | Ccuncil) resolution, by convok- 
Session, hereby isstie the follow. | ing the “National . Assenibly,” 
Ing solemn statement to our|.by adopting the so-called “Con. 
fellow-countrymen. and to she! stitutional Laws," by inalsting 
peopte of the world:: «lon waging civit war, and by 

“We, on behalf of all our)selling the interests of. the nn- 
League members, unanimously] tion, Has becoma the Public 
denounce the unreasonable andjcnemy of the massea and the 
fanatic ‘!egalsntion’ of ‘our/‘tool of ‘American ~renctionary 
League: by okesmgn of the| cliques. ; 
Ministry. “of% the-Inrorlar, of the} "In the ey ths’ masses. , 
Nanking’ reactionary’ dictatorinI| the Nankihg Government has 
Government on Oct. 27, 1947. | {lost the right.to. represent the 

We declare that the aforemen-} pation, ee ‘ 
tioned action -by the Nanking) “With the ‘support of tens of, 
Government is itself unlawful] thousands of League members 
since it even conflicts with theJ in the country and overseas, wo ° 
Nanking Government's —_sclf-» are determineg to stand more 
made legal procedure by virtue! firmly thon ever and to fight to 
of it not being passed by|the end to bring about’ the 
the so-called ‘State Counell’ and | thorough destruction of the 
not publicly announced by the! Nanking regime’ and to realise - 
Executive Yuan, but ‘merely re-| domocracy, peace, independence 


leased as nn order by a spokes:] ind unity In China - Associa- 
man -for the Ministry © of th! ipg: Pree Sir tigienrees ep ? 


Interior. : ; : 
Dictatorial tovoreocooooosooocooers 


“Thig action on the ce of the ; 2 = 

Samra cuyecment swe ws) Fire Ravages 
Saigon. 

Rubber Stocks 


tho said government and pro- 
vides an example of how the 
Nanking Government breaks the 
law and how a dictator imposes 
his own personal will. 
“We, on paale of al) League ‘ci : 10 i Paris, ry un 
offic! sourc estl- 
fuemidse,. ayeby « deciaty., that mated that 2,00. tons. of: 
rubber were -destroped in 
the great fire'at the docks 
at. Saigon. (French Indo-— 
china)’ an’ Agence France 


We cannot accept the dlrnolution 
announcement mado undor coer- 
clon: by some members on the 

Presse despatch, sald today.: 

The dispatch added. that 

the sire had been mastered. 

ter o/b wee 


tendered thely resignationg ond 
closed. down the League Head-|, 
quarters in ‘Shanghai and halted!. 
the activitlea | of all , League: 


MICHAEL WILL ISSUE 
A STATEMENT TODAY. 


ies a _., Lausanne, Jan, 5.) °- . 
Ex-King Michael of Rumanig: willissue'an official 
. statement on his, abdication and‘ future plans 
at Lausanne:tomorrow, says Réeuter. 9 
When’ the exile trala’ of. ex-King:} tantly reVeuled * that no’ ‘invitations 
Michael -arcived at’). the Swelsp | for’ the. wedding . \batween »Michaet 
frontier,, the former ‘monarch: semaine | ind) Anne have‘ bi id 

ed behind. drawn’ curtains and re+ 
fused to descend to accept a telephone 
call from Princess Ann of Bourbon- 
Parma who he plans..to marry.~. 
Officials at the Austrian frontier, 
station of: Feldkirch. just “over the 
border sald ‘the Princess called gatly, i 
today and: asked if Michacl's cight- |. 
Chad strived “and if ahe 


Standing Committee of the 
China Democratic. League (who 
ae Soi 


id Michael réfused ‘to lcave 

here the windows .were 

: “cartalns ‘dtawn ‘aod sald 

he would ¢all hea in Copenhagen as 
coon ‘ashe arrives at’ Lausabne. | Op 

In Copenhagen ‘Princess Anne. of | . 

rasp a said today that, me 

Wap, catremely happy. to have recely 

e-shesss, ~* fron ox-Klng ‘Michael 
that he yr 


MEL EEN ey 
yibeg Fant, 18,0 vase: 
} : Cary 
Switgerlind: | 4 


telephone. her: from 


Hongkong Typewriter Exchange| ._ 


hiang oe 


\ 


‘ 


1 


amen 


‘THE CHINA MAIL, TUESDAY: “IKNUARY 6; ‘1948 ; 


(AL HAS | At Flagstaff House @. O.c. EXPLAINS: LAY-OUT. 


OF GARRISON 
PREMIUM BONDS). IN COLONY 


” Cigarette 


VL: 
Can Do Thé Goverdment’s hint that premium bonds may “Subjge to War Office approval ¥ ain mn prepa vi 
A cigarette can be more than be spohsored inthe Colony,.as_a.means of y timé to move my mMen.out of. Murray Bary: 

. Just a few puffs of nicotine. ratsing the large subscription eavkiped in the racks on, we us 4 sand Waleed B iBa Ks dn 

Ofer chuaers. Vielora, Bor: Rehabilitation Loan Bill, is the subject of two Ra me fon, x ane asd 

racks, was walldng im Kennedy comments in the latest issue of “St. John’s Re- sie op) Rents ayn sui ble alternative 

Fea Inst night sh oot. 120 view,” the Cathedral publication that | th be ites _ a het : eee 

when «an 18-yeur- 5. t be mentione a e pu 7 Thi: k do. b tha I 1. 

snatched They BEPOONE oy aay fo "Ke maa Ae tay, to the first issue .GOC, is pak wae made by dh Bs at le se Bap ant at, : 


Without ado, the 
i thrust her lighted 
the snatcher’s face, 


a Press Conference, at Land 
Forces Hdgs, yesterday, when he 
explained ithe mew lay-out and | 


tachment. at Lyeman! Barracits)st:- : 
, The Garriscn , will’ alsa xcom-}. 
‘grise thet 25th Field, Regiments’, 


er cent. Saterést 


cigarcit? on 
: isappainting. ,- 


-straight-out loan, on a 3% 
basis, has proved distinctly 


: th 
eine ie ih aan ec Orecof the cecrmmenta In “st alco of us are pura’ he com sition of the Colony’s Gar- B.A. at Gun Club, Hi twtr ‘a 
‘ i : = jew" over the initials] gambling = spir' json, attery camp ot Ta m), an ry 
alee inquiries are being ‘car aly — ev” over the sii confeas. that in my own The G.O.C. “anid he was unoble the 2nd Battalion, The Buffs, ab!:! 
: , ‘“~he Honourable Mr, M.M.|cuse it is a mere flutter) and to move..put of Gun Club Hill. | Stanley (with a détuchment abr: 
‘WOCCOOEeOOOO OOTEHEOESF | Woe recent opporition to| fing an outlet for it on the race- rage ot on there was 0 | the” administrative establih- 
Government lotterles is timely|course or at Pi coats ; ultablo alternative accommoda-|'ment'of the = Royal Enginoaky, ... ; 
It-behoves| without coming — tion, : RAO, H-AS.C; .dan R.E.MAB. 


British 
Girl To 


and. public-spirited. 
alt Christians to back up his Carel Pe 
oppositicn to this short-sighted | can ruin lives 
ieeenibt to add to the Colony’s “Foothall Pools provide an 
revenue, It is short-sighted be-| example of how quickly a com- 
in the long ran the de- paratively innocent. pustime can 


however, it General Erskine presidés at the Press Conference whitch was hela at Fiagatatt “J made, known this: view,,to 
Sir Patrick Abercrombie when 


House -yesterday. . 
a he.,waa -hero, and told.ilm Twas 


‘ Pree ee ee RE AR Dhar wth a OM 
mete de elegy foom fA nt is .| re ay to ‘send in: my Fecommenda- 
- no ton to the War Office along this 


line.” soid General Erskine 


will be ut Shamshuipo, | while, 
Whitiicld Barracks will otro’ ee.” 
commodate an RASA, -transptirt — 
company, medigal and eduentlos~ < 
al eatablishmen 

acprel ‘Erskine sald that. ‘the . 


cause 
A terioration in charactey result-| develop Inte a national menace, The G.O.C.. sald: “The Garn- Royal Innleklting ‘Fusiliers wilt 
arr ing from extenalon of the habit] and to-day the whole. Govern- = fn son of this Colony is not com-|fenve’ tho: Colony when “the . 
y pe Ageemiauion will cause an In-| ment ix at its wits’, end A dainan Var Cri es ria plete without the. aaa Gurkhas arrive. 
; crease in crime. And this will] grapple with a problem | wh v4 cms — —— Rideeers Ga ihe agg ote fn an ‘ane rout nie ne colt oe 
weeper mean a larger allocation for the} & er ee thia important way. It, ls my ambl-| com area will tha. y . are nan : 
: Police Force (already a big] would | be deplorable i tlon to seo a strong and vigorous cat 14. Helse ona q hate 


A seSae Becanene ae Pas" {tem in our budget). It is a Colony were faced with such a 


fallen Jn love with a handsome | vicious circle which can only be| Frarkenstein. 
sweeper, or untouchable, In| broken by securing a more ciple 
aah jj ooutners India. public-spirited community. And Principle 
aod hay “declded to marry hin . it} 7 5 

public-spiriteg communities can It seems ta me that the Hong 
and Hive sith nim, shat iaian {net be'obtained (least of all in Kong Government is paying 
little regard to. principle. The 


his work.’ relates the ‘Indlan 
News Chronicle’ of New Delhi. | Hong Kong) by encouraging the 
population to adopt get-rich- revenue of the Colony is Insuffl- 


’ entity, cither, remarked quick methods. r 
thit althoweh marriages be-| shown that resort to immora) 
tween tndiana and Europeans | practices is a prelude to dectine, 
. 


Volunteer Force with a fully re. 
cognised status working with tue 
cegular Garrison, Until we havo 
thnt we. shall be missing an ¢s- 
sential element in the Garrison. 

“One important step which I 
very much welcome -is the ‘ap- 
pointment of Colonel Ride as 
There could beno 


{560 and 342 a yenr ngo);, no 
botelq (2); no schools - (4); # 
godowns (20); 8 Jopancse i“ : 
td property (8): and 19 offices. ; 
1 comp and 2 lands (46). © ini?) 
All. «requisitioned — property: 
would be released before Oct}1a1 
this year, except Japanese owned 
property. - oer a 


THIS IS THE. STORY | OF 
“DUSS IN BOOTS” — PLUS 


bs B ts” .and o 16 other Japanese was told in. the 
The eer Pas ini Boe Court t Kowloon yesterday. *° Among the 16) Commandant, 


The newspaper, which did t rita: 
hot identify History has] went to meet necessary | ¢x- Australian. War, c 7 es Co botter-known figure with a: dis- New Plans 
penditure for sume ycara to was an Admiral— ara Suzumu. “ ” d Taiji tinguished war second te oer General Erskine said. plang" 
ome, and quite properly off Also included were: Matsukawa Chuzo ( Heavy. xv. Harry ), 4 ane ate ond se-create # the HIEVDC. 2] wero now before the War’ OMe 
were net uncommon, “perhaps! apurther, Hong Kong's vul-| Authorities decide to raise. a Tamaki (“Friendly Fred”—later Hateful Harry") ordon Coventry”| wont, eee and Colonel | for the — modernisation | and. re. 
thi ix the first instance where! oy, porition shoul warn| loan, That is a matter of busi- was there too. ; ; ae PO ah Me gt Ato auipp a oe ne Co ee cmnee: 
Ps i a ee us to be as blameless ax Caesar’: ce and, ae ae Ragen The trial may will be ranked a call, from Captain Kondo, ‘secin to us they all adred at put in to tidy up the past, advisa tet the G.0.C, said at ang 
hiec name Where. ake: weld be wife, We should give no easy meal ve ie Sate Nee hoe ot second only to those being held[ Commander of the Japanese jaugnter at the pt sd ra about the future and keep the UTookea end Rg imigt sy aly 
sharing the joys and, sorrows Setatn ne eee pe tract sufficient funds” (and I{!n Tokyo, sald the Cee Hendy eked serge sory De pea Pe eran sil ee Prralictments existences Finted cases of Saito and.Tokunay: 
ot her lowly hua fs ateon’s stand against lotteries 4 Admiral Susmu and his .16| Headquarters were in the arca.| wr. a “Vga, It will be sten that man: 
Ot hue laws husband: shows that those who guide the |leuld have | thought the rate] | coclatea are charged with war] He read a proclamation ask- “Puss in Boots” As tothe response e the call Pics: and et Ait Se ; 


Sweepers customarily Per} Cotonyta destiniea ure keenly | Was geod encugh), then the rate) eoes committed on Hainan| ing for obedience and diligent} After dealing with other of for local men for the administra: | criminals have had. a {ust trial 


eae es ue nee eet alive to the Jong-term damage | should pe rat apis dangle Island between November, 1942.| work but threatened severe] the prisoners, McIntyre turned dia beiset yer yper at suid (ons and received well-merited punistt. « 
fai hth He pieahoe excellent | ts will result from short-term be iate aad renal ariel atjand August, 1946. punishment for acts of opposi- ee ong 3 Kyukient| #2, 3, wan intended to. give the Se arity aie tet olen: 

: § ; benefits.” be repay : The court comprised, Lieuten-| tion. 8 ia Ensign yukich!) chinese, Cadres—who, bad service "We! 
‘ ‘ abe ois : E ca: "We 
Ran Rae sii, ave eee Li i of Se ae OL ant-Colonet H.G, Guinn (Pre-| | He personally told the Com-| Susuki. He (was Officer-in-| 7 Burma ogre elsewhere and who Genorat. taking deck OTondord of 
polities and the professions and Gambling Spirit tn nee ue GE che confidence sldent), Lieutenant-Colonel J.T. manding Officer that “Although charge of the food andl clothing] had not. yet, been See aa self-respect und decency althouity' 
there are untouchables who are] The other signed by P.S.C. tacheuee Breck (Judge Advocate), Majer| foog would be monotonous it} section. one gree aia Sew | Prostitutes are ten a penny nnd 
Minjatera jn both the India and| easily identified” as Mr. P.S:|" "Ay President Coolidge terse | N. McLeod, nnd Lieutenant R.| would be ample.” He hela this post for eleven, net ns Brorbel_Reepers, are. Sie I 

: : Carter. It is q matter of regret that} nonths The strength, of the proposed 


The present average ‘VD. nguro- 
among the Forces was four. or 
flve a day, which He considered 
normal in -relation to the size of 
the Garrison. 


Cassidy, is in the 
terms: 


“Premium 


Pakistan + Governments.—Asso- 


following] ly remarked, when askeg his 
s ciated Press, y 


nder his regime the men in 
views on ‘sin,’ ] am against it. U € e new Garrison would be about the 


the cimp took steps to combat . ut British 
n (ood ant medicinal starvation sue aaa be the 
policy-and a secret organiza‘ion At peak. strength, when he. firat 


natural death hos enabled Cad. 
tain Kondo to escape. juatice by 
preventing us from including 
-him in the dock this morning.” 


Major Grant McIntyre, Aus- 
tralian Diviston, SCAP (GHQ), 
em nee Tokyo, conducted the prosecu- 


Bonds are asso- 


ciated in my mind with the 


' FOOD FIGURES 


nefarious campaign which land- tion. was established to barter and|arrived here, the garrison consist. - 
Fon and ei costa for the on ere, aetna is geal. Wh he rs Bhs a MeIntyre told the sald the fhe Sureeon Y dia koe ed ok seven vealoe aon cone 
ok shidlingidutiodise f ‘ — . ree. 3 
EA TEA eS a pg RR aa a e It_ began, he said, convenient - With great “persona) risk men org Eisking ‘révested that] ,,2VeW, Bylaws, for roast (or. 


catties respong to the Financin! Scere-! Captain McIntry went on to traded with Chinese and bought cooked) meat shops are: on- ane 


ian Phrewood 


Rice & Flour .... 7.2 $4,5400 % ee: ly on October 26, 1942 Then a describe how: on November 7 two Gurkbg battalians: are. ,to.bo 0 
Ventless Te Sebago | tary’ . in aren for an ox party of Dutch and Australlan| 1942 Captatn Ishiro. Kikuchi] d7v9s back into the camp. stationed, jn the Colony—at San agenda at the Urban Council's 
wanetalte 70 | preasion of viows on the subject as) Large amounts of Vitamin B|/wal.Camp (with .a detachment meeting to-day. 

arti MDMOR EG ces : Re without showing partiality, But premne o sar mae been duccd te the ae and ane were Joaded off and on ships a 

eee tenn ee ‘ Mr. Watson was capture uce mse! 

a ee “Oe20 pointing out Mine Praaiie Ov ¥ Kill for an unknown destination. district surgeon. ty pi : oe one et. ties 

Fish w.c.c..0, 4 ©9120] Bonds are in the nature of a e In the party were 263 Aus-| As auch he was responsible fons that Austrajian War- 

Pork 3 tralian officers and men, as well| for hygiene and medica) affuira] 9°08 hp A es aaa 

0 


Norman was 
men 


‘lottery, and that it has been the 
consistent policy of successive 


rant Officer 11 
ordered to beat. up the 


Capetown, Jan. §,, [as 237 Duteh prisoners. Of peluoners of Wat: peninsula Hotel arrivala:—( Mr. Ernest Winklery.- mor 


Bean Curd 7000 j " ‘So Th re told that the naw| H ied his position unt!) 
British Administrations  to|_ The South African warship ye e cceupled his position unl!) Vorking in the hold of the ship and Mri “Schwab,.| chant, 76 MacDonnell Road, to 
‘ y Transvaal has suddenly. le{t heye|camp would be a convalescent} March, 1945. | Mr, and Mrs. G.E. “Schwa 
MOLT sista inde tele ence 12.7130 | avold the sponsorship of lot-) unger seated orders and headed canip where medicines and pro- During the first few months When he refusgd, the guards) wy and Mra. P.R. Pedersen,| Miss Maric, Loufse Lixon,, tea~, 


Avguitine, 


set upon the men themselves, 


toreies in any shape or form. Mr, and Mrs, R.L. Moore, -Mr.|cher, 21 Rue ‘Des 


towards the Antarctic where It 


{le} hy ineg patients. 

is believed a serfous clash over | PY: treatment would be avail-| he examined p The Prosecutor also derplled| and Mrs. A. Matti, G:R.: Tor-|Tournai, Belgium.’ 
the ownership of killed, whales ) #ble. “Although,” the , Presecutor| the qoinga of, Tajitha’ TamakzT : ‘ Sgt, Arthur Edward Osborn, 
lias froken cat between two or} ,On November 5, 1942, aboard] said, “he did it very sketchily ("Friendly Fred"), ina ¢ to Sd = ag ONS a B. MH, iin Pt Mise : 
three fleets in, 47 expeditions the “Taiko. Maru,” they arrived] and usually to disprove the} the camp in December, ods: H cae “d. Mra. D. Yolanda Gentina dos Renadiont(: 
representing Britain, Russia, at Bakli.on the west coast of] Allied Médical Officer's diagno-|.. tye held this posting for seven ufhes, oa sate Ographcra, 26 .Ashile: Ross, ! 

apan,. South Africa. Holland } rainan Island. that thi ‘Campbell A.J. Cox, Ps do Jong, nographera, y 
ana Norway. . sis or to prove, that the man} months until August 20, 1944] p parcell, Dr. C.P. Allen, Mrs. pwiseny 
THE VA CAI Orders to put to sea were given} .2he were placed in o camp) was not sick at ‘all. said the Prosecutor. His, nlck,| A’ Moston ad ee Agdecean; 


Daring thé firat seven monthe 
there were 594 cases of ‘dysen- 
tery treated in. hospital, 

Until the end of: August, 1943, 
the. Japaneso did nothing to 
cope: with the situation in the 
camp, 

According to the Allied ‘ostor 


compound fenced with ao low 
barbed wire fence. 

The Australians—sick men, 
officers and other ranks—were in 
one hut; all the Dutch in an- 
other; and two ather huta were 
oteupied by coolica. 

The sick wére in the same hut 


naome,. had J then been changed 10] 


“Hate Try". 
“Contes Covent ry”. 

“In October, 1946”; Pro-| 
sccutor added, “the prisoners 
had sist. first exp erlence with 
the pfenuant shige efada Orsuki 
—also known as “Gordon 


by the’ Commodore of the South 
Airican navel forces fomediately 
z Mitan, Jan. 4 after returning by_air rom @ 
A are Pretori ith 

The Italian Commi ret ae boss, Palmiro Togltatti, to General Smuts 
the 


day denounced the United States and the Vati- OMeciat circles describe 
ean as the world’s biggest warmongers, in af cmeracncy departure as a “rou 


tine exercise” but it is ‘known 
six-hour spetch at the opening session of {that the ship is loaded with 600 


«Peni separa ‘Chae. gon. Of to 
. Miner, _ Pollock, une Yan Mel Lan, j itooke:, 
We Cask ae ie place: atthe Sppréme. ' Court 
James Macallum, Myr. and Registry yesterday in the pre-:. 
Mra. H.-Jnakacn, Me,- ang ‘Mrs.|.sence;,,of;Mre. Caroling Dnisy 
NLF. C.M..' Mathie Thompson and Mr. Dave. Muir 


cers. Club,’ tae el 


Nicolson, 
Italy’ i: th Communist . Congress here tons of oll—enough for a return} as. tha othors.., in the camp (Doctor Aiken) 11- H ‘ Mill 
wT 7 : r — Coventry” , (the well Known] son, Miss Jean: Jones, Ed. or. 
‘The danger of war {s the; ewered it with a document in voyeae to the Antort aid Under these conditions, an| most every man in the . force Australian footballer noted for| Sassoon, A.B. Hughes, J.M. | + tices gate oon 


had beri-berf to soma extent.” 
“One day in July Captain 
Kikuchi took a’ party of Japan- 


issue of seventeen and oa half 
pints of disinfectant was mad¢ 
during the two and a half years 
on the island, ese officers around the hospital 
While living-undeér thede con- and pointed out the worst cases 
ditions the prisoners recolved, to them and odq though it may. 


consequence of expansfon and 
programme of world domina- 
tion by un imperialatic power,” 
Toglatti said. “Thin is the 
kind cf process going on now 
in the United States, 


which was justified the war po- Murphy, “3.B, Hendry, F.X.>¢7he, tlemine puneneen eobeed ee. 
Cleary; Mr. and Mrs. EB. Cats, |row on Dee. 18 for Hong ‘Kons t—Me- 


the Japanese Army,*Otsuki was i Tue M. Sutten and Mrs, _ dy a Aticell, Rev, 


eventually engaged - on uard Bushet!,, Ade Be 
durfes over the P.W.. work parties : ie Mf. rsa ay sre i. 
in..Halnan. He remained there|- Passengers by BAA’ Clip- don, G, BE, Mr. and 


his skill] in kicking”). 
Discharged as a private from 


wt Alr Force. officers on board and 
licy of American imperialism,” jwas hurricdiy fitted with a port- 
Togtiatt! asserted. vble radiv ‘transmitting station 

He demanded that his Party {with telescopic masts.—Our Own 
act to “unmask provocateurs Correspondent. 
and, once’ they are identified as = 


} “But there {s another power, 
the Vatican, which, while con- 
ducting on the one side q cam- 
paign for pence in general 
terms that delude the people, off 
the other side Hnea up with 
the imperiallstic powers any 
time . the | international situation 
worsens.’ 


"United StateA Americans, to 
show to all men and women in| ‘The secon@. aession of the 
the street where the danger of Portuguese Institute took place 
war comes from. yesterday afternoon at the Club 
‘We must conduct our cam- Lusitano, when Dr. Olinto de 
paign of unmasking provoca-|Sousu spoke on “Sidelights on 
teurs because: the Government| Portuguese Medicine.” The 
of our country has sold itself speaker was introduced by -the 


to American imperialism.” 


laterim Cabinet 
In Indonesia 


until March, 1945; | pera:—J, W,, Harper and, Miss. 

Charges recorded agalist him anila), T- Ja. 
include:— Beating with rifle,)] Anderson (for uam) and : 
iting on.. head . with . wood, Hammond (for § Sat "Franéiato). 
triking with. . shovel, beatlng 
bout the face wlth. "jignalling |‘! 
flag aud many examplea of 
Kicking, ae 

Atier. detalling the progressive 


CH Crillys, 
cane sith, Cha 


Chairman, oS A. M Rodr gues, 


This is the first time Togltatt! 
has publicly attacked the Ro- 
man .Catholic Church as. a 
warmonger, o favourite Com- 
munist word. 

“Lost. autdmn, while. the 


degredation in the camp... the 
Federal Govefnment Frevecator came . it sea 
erel; ted geo, Aoyama, who, - ha 82) 
vi enelan. lately teat apie gommend until the end: 

tierlands img tet a a 


the todey,, said thot fhe. sormas.- 
Was. among the “immed 


Togiiatti cfted figures he bor pet Jan, 4. 
credfted to. President Truman 
on.. American production and 


military strength and said they ; - . ot 
from the: 


were “absolutely truc.” 

Ho added, “Thi { IF IT'S NEWS, a 
world situation was worsening | the United States hae teins bow oan : = - Govertime melt aritoutice 
rapidly, the official Pieri or ed i mporlalistic doctrine. : LL PRINT IT A relation to , this eteoti 

pit_wrote—an_atticlé—condemp— bs Pee ata ti ctr al Fat il ivan eek 
ayment fore a! territor! : bo ; 
ing war. A .few weeks, after,| United States must aecept the ; publican ae us ae eg a anebclte Durch ‘ hospital, sheets. 
when . internitional relations destiny of being, the strongest Premler, today, was belrig broad- ; of his.; Cabinet a all pene “and sugar thar thes 
aes ‘ea Liar _ apa power in the world and the rés- caat to the Indonesian Republican ‘ and Dr. Huberfus Van ey Al str iopert 
-sweléomed the sHonange at the leisy i cn ‘in, this oe an’ "tation to en ts Govetise Genera: : ah ny Pron € Ale Sills to eat rats 

}:) (} Wl id “yt 

yates Stated Présfdont bit’ an- Freee . deine conts,"—United SO. as ith the delegates, . 


"The communique: tesued , after proved’ the regolu- Dea ah ond tatfor 
inte 


ef ely 


wat 


The formation of an Inte 
reparation for a 
re pager is to 


rw, Bieter, 
) a "Be AG tapers left - wilt : ‘A, J, Hancock, apt. ¥. 
es grboat: amie Uannheers, He enone Mise G. 
Lids, A Yt re G.. bist 
tae Bea vin... a 


‘rom 41 
ratlon waa lowered, to 
dramas; . the, Japanese, mayiq 


Baritrop, T. 
Harria (for, Sint 
Huliitig, Mis i 


— on 24384 


‘you TOO CAN DE A REPORTER.. 
Tie wept reer 


ee eotee _ ont ti | 
_ 9! 
Nall © Heo aftiges”™ 


13 A. a 
a Oy ab ee ee 
ya Feulu ‘ i i wan. sh RN. ; fae q Bal an ae 


FIRST WOMAN 


.“FACED 


WITH 


A SKELETON © 


Yesterday marked’ the shouldering of a new civic 


responsibility by the 
when, for the first 


women. of Hong Kong 
time in local history, 


...women jurors were empanelled for a Criminal 
Sessions case at the Supreme Court. 


Tho trial was.a murder trial, 
which was also unique in that 
portions of the skeleton of the 
alleged victim were produced 
in Court, 

Those who thought that the 
sight of o human skeleton would 
unnerve the women jurors were 

- doomed to dinappointment. 

They not only took a keun 
intercat in the proceedings, bul 
scrutinized, with minute enre, 
the skull of the alleged victim 
when it was placed before them 
for inspection. 

There were 
the jury. 

Before they were sworn 1m, 
Mr, Justice FE.H. Williams 
(Chief Justice), pointed out 
that the ‘charge on which the 
accused, Lit Chun alias Ng 
Chum, waa being tried, was that 
of murder. i 

He enquired if any of the 

. omen jurors had, on a matter 
‘of principle, any objection to 
serving. * : 

There being no objection, the 
jurors were then sworn in, af 
ter which Mr. Justice Willlame 
gave a-brief restime of the birth 
and growth of the fury system 
fn England ang mentioned that 
women were first called upon to 
serve as jurors in England in 
1919. 

Mr, A.J. Clifford, assisted by 
Det. Insp. GE. Willerton,' is 
conducting the case for the pro- 
secution, 

The accurcd, who ia charged 
with the murder off Ng Shui 
on July 28, 1947, in defended by 
Mr, Percy Chen, who has bern 
assigned for the defence by the 
Crown. 

Tho prosecutor, (Mr. Clifford) 
xald that up to the time of the 
alleged murder, the two men 
appeared to have been on good 
terms, although it was alleged 
by the prosecution that accused 
owed the deceared $40. 

‘On July 28 deceased Ieft in 
company with the accused, The 
wife of the deceased would say 
that decenseg never arrived 
home that night. ; 


Scattered 
‘The remains of deceused were 
found scattered on the hillside 
and in a nullah on Sept, 4, 
The Police were notifieg and 


four womon on 


* TRUSTEE * 
of 


MABRIAGE AND OTHER 
SETTLEMENTS 


The advantages derived therefrom 
tacrit investigation by all who would | 
safeguard the future for themselves 
and their dependants. 


* This ts just * 
one of many services offored 
. | With the assurance — 
the of 
. @. 4 CONTINUITY . | 
’ e.. EFFICIENCY | 
t,. |! EXPERIENCE ° 


.. and. : : 
PERSONAL ATTENTION. 


4 


HONGKONG ‘AND SHANGHAI, 


following enquiries, accused was 
arreated in a hut at Homuntin 
Hill. . 
He was informed that he was 
suapected of murdering Ng Shui 
at Aberdeen. 

Accused is then alleged to 
have replied: 

“Ng Shui waa killed by me 
with one blow with a pole by 
mijatuke.” 

On Sept, 13, when formally 
charged, ‘necused anid: “IT did 
atrike him, but I kileld him by 
mistake,” 

After this necused 
thur heard to say: 
him with a stick 
him down the hillside.” 

After evidence by a number 
of ‘witnessea, hearing was nade 
journed till 10.30 a.m. teday, ax 
the Court and jury will first 
make a visit to the acene of the 
allegeq crime, 


“We May 
Discover 
Something” 


waa fur- 
“T atruck 
ang pushed 


“We may uncover something 
Interesting,” Mr. Latimer sald 
vhen he remanded Siu Liu, 21- 
year-old married woman of No, 
516 Shanghal Street, who ap- 
peared at Kowloon Magistracy 
yesterday on a charge of simple 
larceny of two Ivory mahjong 
pieces. 

“And the stolen set may be 
recovered too,” Presecution Ofl- 
cer Inspector Orem added. 

Leung Woon, mistress of a 
general repair shop at No, 1 Aus- 
tin Road, told the Court that de- 
{tndant came to her shop at 10 
am. last Sunday with lwo 
women and two boys, 

After they had left, Leung said 
she discovered oa mahjong set 
missing and was informed by a 
passerby that one of the women 
had taken It. ‘ 

Complainant sald she saw the 
women running and arrested de- 
fendant who had stopped to pick 
up the two mahjong pleces which 
apparently had dropped. 

Defendant, who sald her bus- 
band was in Canton, pleaded not 
guilty, saying that. she did not 
know the other women and that 
she did not stop to pick up the 
Pieces. 

She was remanded = 24 hours 
pending further investigation. 


BLACKMARKETEERS 
CAUGHT ON WHARF 


Police vigilance brought two 
black-marketeers, arrested at 
the Kowloon-Canton Ralflway 
Station iast Sunday, before Mr. 
Latimey at Kowloon Magiatracy 
yesterday. 

"Sin Ha (31), unemployed, of 
No. 454, Lockhart Road, and 
Law Yiu (48) wero each fined 
$75 for offering KCR tickets for 
sale at above the original prices. 

Firat defendant was seen by 
DPC 48 trying to sell a Third 
Class KCR ticket at $10 ($8.80). 

Second defendant wag seen ‘by 
DPC 881 trying to sell a Second 
Class ticket at $22 ($17.60), 

Boatman Wong Fuk (22) had 
to pay $10 fine for evading ferry 
fore (20 cents) at the Yaumati 
Ferry Pier last Sunday ‘morn- 
ing. 


SPAIN WANTS A 
SHARE 


‘< . Madrid, Jan.. 4. 
The Spanish Foreign Minis- 

ter, Senor Alberto Mertin 

Artajo, asked ‘about the poasi- 


‘| bility of Spain sharing in the 


Marshall ‘aid to Europe, sald 
‘that if the big powers 
ly: wanted “to use every means 
for: the reconstruction of 
DL id 4 £§ng Q Go ‘| 
Bpain the facilities for pur- 
chasing raw materials and ma- 
chinery. . 
“{t does not matter so much 


| whother the money, comes from 
Jone place or another,” he said, 
{or whether as o loan or {n any 


other form ‘under the Marshall 
on or any other ‘plan.”—Reu: 


JU 


real- 


RORS 


er er 


Cn rn cece 


THE CHINA MAIL, TUESDAY, JANUARY. G,. 1948, 


Pere 


a "Ew & 
» "% vay 


This tooks a bad photograph but on December 22 a 


Royal Afr Force bomber, 18,000 


for the first time fram England. 


feet up saw the new comet 
Meteorological conditions 


prevented Briton’s seelng it from the ground. 


The new comet was first seen from 


South Africa and 


Austrialin shmultancously December 9, and js still travelling 
through spice at 250,000 miles an hour. : 


The tall-of the comet is believed by 


astronomers to be 


more than ten milllon miles long, . 
PHOTO SHOWS: —The ertmet os it appeared to Austra- 
Nans from Melbourne on the s:cund night of appearange, De- 


cember 1,—A Photo, 


RUSSIAN. TO CONDUCT 


ANTI-RED 


CAMPAIGN 


Shanphai, Jan. 5. 


Elias Shendrikoff, 71-year-old founder of the Rus- 
sian Menshevik branch of the. revolutionary 


party which later was 


outlawed by the Lenin- 


Stalin clique of the Bolsheviks, left today for: 


the Unite 
sian anti-Communist 
anti-Soviet campaign. 
Shendrikoll sald he expected to 
conter with Alexandtr Kerensky 
in the United States and ga ta 


CANON DOES — 
PENANCE FOR 
THIEF 


FINCHLEY, JAN. 5. 

CANON CHRISTOPHER 
TURNER, VICAR OF FINCH- 
L°E-Y,  LRICESTERSHIRE, 
WHO IS DOING AN ACT OF 
PENANCE. FOR THE THIEF 
WHO TOOK PARCELS _IN.- 
TENDED FOR POOR CHIL- 
DREN IN EUROPE FROM 
THE CHRISTMAS — TREE 
OUTSIDE: THE PARISH 
CHURCH, REFUSES TO DIS- 
CLOSE THE NATURE OF 
THE PENANCE. 

He says: “The penance is 
known only to myself and in be- 
ing carried out during certain 
services in church. If any of 
my parishioners after scrvices 
communicate what I am doing 
that Ss not my affair." 

Asked about the possibility, of 
the thelr making reparation, 
the Canon snid it was quite 
possible. That would be a mat- 
ter between the individual and 
himself.—Reuter, 


U.K. DELEGATES 
- TO UN. 


** Southampton, Jan, 6. 

Mr. Philip Noel-Baker, Sccre- 
tary for Commonwealth- Rela- 
tions, left in the Queen Eliza- 
beth today, heading the British 
delegation to the Security Coun- 
cil meeting of the United Na- 
tions, which will discuss the 
question of the Indian-Pakiatan 
dispute over. Kashmir. 

Accompanying Mr.  Noel- 
Baker is Lord Ismay, who had 
just -returned from *Indla— 
Reuter. 


HOPES TO HAVE 
‘ANOTHER , 


New York, Jan,. 5. 
orm i = 


rw. r) WY Cs 
dian. slave, Mrs, Martha H. 
Shephered, who has been. blind 
for 14 years, celebrated - her 
102nd, birthday at the home of 
a daughter hero on New Year's 


Jan. '1,, 


she hoped to have another party. 
next -year-Reuter,, 


States to contact other exiled Rus- 


leaders in a worldwide 


Mexico City to meet the free 
Ttusstan Committee recently 
formed -there, 

Shendrikoff, who represented 
the Menshevik branch in two 
post.revolution Russian govern- 
ments, charged that the Soviet 
Union wag “preparing itself very 
actively for o new .and = more 
terrible war.” He sid the pecple 
of Russta; cut off from outside 
information, hnve no idea of the 
dunger hanging over their coun- 
(x; 


” Preparing For War - 


The cxile, who hus. ‘been in 
China 27 ‘years,’ sald! “Tho ‘ded- 
polling of North Korea, the 
transformation of small states into 
submissive humble gatellites and 
the use of prisoners of war in 
Russia as reol slaves in building 
up an army ezmposed of German 
war prisoners with their own 
gencrals in charge—all’ this -testl- 
fies; that Russia is preparing It- 
self very actively for'a new und 
more terrible war.” : 

“Russia js.in ruins,” he ‘said. 
“According to statements of the 
Communists. themselves the ter- 
ritory between the -Volaa and 
Warsaw 18 a virtual desert—with 
a starving Population, undlothed 
and unhoused. The nation is 
bankrupt” 60” 

Shendrikeff, a prominent Shang- 
haj attorney, expects to arrive In 
San Francisco in the middle of 
January aboard the American 
President Liner General Melgs. 


Kolchak. Follower 


As a labour leader In the: Cau 
cusinn ollfelds during the Russo. 
Jdpanese war he organised 
workers mto ao union which 
renched an agreement with the 
industrialists, This act worsened 
the split between the Mensheviks 
and the Bolsheviks as the latter 
demanded violence ngainst the 
industrialists rather than agree- 


ments. cae 
Prior to the final outlawing of 
the. Mensheviks, Shendrikoff- was 
commissioner for Turkestan _ in 
the provisional 1917 government 
of Prince Lvov and Inter served 
two: years in the administration 
of Admiral] Kolchak, He came to 
Shanghat in the latter part of 
1920.—United Press. . 


Jewel Store Robbery 


allas Lok 

four coun 
add amm 
and consp! 


TheComet| SHE_LO 


ST HER 
CASH_IN 
A LIFT 


Lau Mo Fun, 23, resld- 


jing at Room 305 Nam 


Ping Hotel, defendant in 


a charge of having taken |. 


ion of $400 when 
she believed the owner 
could: be found, was con- 


| victed by Mr. FX: d’Al- 


We oe binah - 
‘Took 
His Hire 


“I worked for him for 
several months and he ow- 
ed me wages,” 25-year-old 
Yeung Po, told Mr,‘ Blair- 

. Kerr when he was charged 
with stealing 20 pleces of 
clothing, two dogs and threa 
chickgns, property of his 
ex-employer, at No. 3 Texa- - 
co Branch Road, last Satur~ 
day night, 

Defendant, who pleaded 
guilty at Kowloon Magistracy 
yesterday. to stealing. the 
clothing . but not. guilty to 
taking away the animals, wis 
sentenced to «nine months’ 
hard labour and reccmmend- 
ed for deportation, . 

The Prosecution satd that 
Yeung, who was ° dismissed 
by Hung Fat three days ago, 
broke into his ex-employor's 
hut thrcugh a hole in a.wall 
and escaped by unlocking a 
dobr, between 11 p.m. and 
2.30 am, - . 

Thé dogs and chickens, the 
prosecution, added, might 
have escaped “through = the 
hole made by defenont. 


“BUT IT WAS 


NEW YEAR'S. 
EVE” 


“Brit for thie ifact that it was 
New Year's Eve I would take a 
serious viow of the case,” sald 
Mr. 3.°G. ConkUn at Central 
Magistracy, yesterday to Able 


Seaman KR. Norman. 
Norman, who was charged with 


disorderly conduct in a public place 
while under the influence of drink 
and malicious damage of a plite glass 
window, wae ordered to pay $100. to 
the Holland Cafe, se 

Mr. Conklin said that one of de- 
fendant’s witnesses had proved.= pro} 
secution witness to ‘have been tying 

He therefore cautioned Norman on 
the first charge and’ found him not 
guilty of the second. |” re 

Defendant said he became: involy- 
ed with several Chinese trying to sell 
him fireworks, : ‘ 
~ A fried, Able Seaman Taylor, was 
accidentally pushed through the show 
window. 

Taylor gave evidence for defen- 
dant with hls. arm-in a sling. 

Marine Srollart testified to having 
seen Taylor acoidentatly . pushed 
through the window, © . 

‘3.7. Cruz of 28, Caroline Hill 
Road, pleaded’ guilty before 
Mr. J.G, Conklin at Central 
Magistracy yesterday, on .a 
charge of driving a motoy cycle 
without’, efficient brakes. : 
fendant was fined $50. 


eer 
rounds’, 
~ of 


a 


pants . tok 

‘would. be ‘kdlled.": eh 

«, Immediately , two-.other mon 

entered, who produced revolvers. 
: his ‘assistant... 


‘| with 


. 12,33 p.m,—éiwinx and: way 
Paradeith Hal |* 
‘at’ BOW: 


"Repent end]. 


mada at Central Magis- 
tracy yesterday and sen- 
tenced to thrée months’ 


imprisonment. and ‘re-’ 


commended for bantish- 
ment. _ 


According to Inspector Moran, 
defendant entered a Mfr at the 
Sincere Co, together with others, 

She was further alleged to 
have cither taken from the per- 
son or picked up the money and 
made ao quick getaway. 

Defendant admitting — picking’ 
wp the money but denied having 
taken it from complainant's 
handbag. 

Leung Cham Sun, ‘lift opera. 
tor of the Sincere Co., sald thar 
an the jift stopped at the first 
floor and while . people were 
getting out he saw ‘defendant 
opening complainant’a handbag, 

Before he could inform vic- 
tlm, defendant had left the 
clevator and made for the 
stairs, : 

Asked ff she had anything to 
say, defendant replied that she 
knew It waa wrong and asked 
for leniency. 


COOKED FOOD 
WITHOUT LICENCE 


Tam Hi and Kwong Pong, 
charged .before Mr, F.X. 
d'Almadao at Central Magistracy 
yesterday’ with operating two 
ecoked food statla at Birds 
Street without a licence, were 
each fined $200 or three weeks. 

Ingpector Hollingsheag said 
that stalls were operating in 
Birds Strect with olectric wir- 
ing running the entire length 
af the street and fitted | with 
electric bulbs as well as port- 
able gas. lights. , ; 

Wines were served and it was 
more ofan open air restaurant, 

The stalls oceupied some’ 160 
yards ang were definitely aon 
obstruction, : 

‘The special dish of the day 
wag cooked dog’s meat, ‘ 

Forty-one customers, charged 
causing: an obstruction, 
were each fined $1 . or three 
days.‘ A Ait omg 


e 


At the request of the pro- 
secution, Mak Ming: (40) of 
No, 87, Weosung Street, was 
remanded one weck On a charge 
of keeping a heroin divan, 

Appearing with him at Kow- 
loon Magistracy yesterday be- 
fore Mr. Latimer, was Lon Lup- 
tse (27) who was fined $10 or 
three days for possessing 100 
pills of heroin, $e 

“Lim Hol-po (41), charged 
with possession of five heroin 
pipes, Yuen Shu (82), charged 
with possessing an oplum pipe, 
and Lo Sam, charged with 
smoking heroin, had their $35 
bail estreated on falling to 
appear. | . : 


RADIO — 


ZBW Hong Kong. broadeseting on 
a frequency of 845 kilocycles | from 


{12.15 to 2.00 p.m, and from 6.00 to 


11.00 pm. and “alio on. 9.52 
megacycles in the 31 metre band 
from 12.18 to 1.30 6.30'td 7.30 and 
9.00 to 11.00 p.m, oy 


HET, 
12.15 p.m--Studio: Raligfous. Talk. to 
4" Children, a kes ke 8 
1 frean 
with Sammy 
. Kaye: “a . 
1,00 p.m.—Light Plano 
* Lorenso (Recorded ‘a 
1.18 p.m—News, Weather 
' Announcements, 
1.26, p.m—Oreheatral Interlude 
1.80 p.m—"From: the | 
"Opera. : es 
200 p.m—Clae Down.. ae 
4.00 p.m—B.B.0, eprivtion Services 
“Navy Mixture. ey 
whe 8 


+ Light 


.. Home 
(25 pn-~—Btodlo; 
tt) Midheel “Boder 


om ; 1 
“In choosing your alde to 
levellnese—cheove 


L 


because theee cosmetics are eepecially pre- 


ive you “AEAUTY APPEAL” . 


plan thal 


"VELVET-BMOOTH SKIN" 


which every woman wants, 


In addition, remember that wil eudstances * 
known to cause allergic reactiona hare 
boon eliminated from 


breparations—they cannet harm you 


the least whether you are susceptible to 
mlgralne heedaches, hives, skin redness. 
asthma or other symptoms which owe 
their diecohifort to the use ef a beanly— 
ald contaloing an allergen. 


PB, — Theee non-allergle 
conmeticn will be avaliable 


ee from 12th January, 10d8 


10 Valuable Books 
for | 


AMBITIOUS “MEN 


Ambitlous, men and women 
who desire” to cultivate their 
mental’ powers, ‘to acquire the art 
of. effective ‘expression, to widen 
their, cultural .knowledge and to 
get. ‘na clearer understanding of 
English literature cinnot do better 
than’ invest in tho well-known 
reading courses and other vitally 
‘hetptul books issued’ by Fleet 
Publications,’ 


Most. of the works described 
below have run into several 
editions. All the books can be 
supplicd by next: mail, 


AN OUTLINE COUKSE IN 
MIND TRAINING. :— The sub- 
jects. covered include: Your 
Unused. Powers: Observation, At: 
tention and ‘Memory, .How to 
Develop Your: Creative Mind: 
Learning.to Think Logically; How 


to.Form Sound: Judgments; Tralp.. 


ing the Wil to Do;' Cultivating 
Your Personality, Price, 4s, 2d. 


AN OUTHINE COURSE IN 
SELF-EXPRESSION. — Chief 
subjects treated: Bullding Up a 
Good: Style;’ How. to Find s 
Frosh Polnt of View; How to 
Cultivate Your Imnginatlon: The 
Art’ ‘of’ Conversation; Public 
Speaking;. Writing the. Short 
Story; Letters that Interest; Read. 
Ing for Svif-Culture; Keeping 
Your Mind Alert, Price, 45, 3d: 


AN OUTLINE COURSE IN 
GENERAL CULTURE. — This 
unique work, with {ts remarkable 
range of interest, gives a Vivid, 
survey of. history, the arts, 
aclence, religion and philosophy, 
and provides an: excellent: ground. 
Ing an general culture. Price, 
ig. 2d. 4 


AN OUTLINE: COURSE IN 
ENGLISH LITERATURE -— A 
clear and fascinating introduction 


to the riches of English literature. |' 


Price, 4s, 2d, 


MODERN PUNCTUATION 
HANDBOOK .—-Designed for the 
husy reader, thts bodk- by Francis 
Foster shows ‘the Importance of 
correct, punctuation and explains 


G.N.A‘C. de luxe DC-4 lonves hére ‘daily f6r-Shanghal at’ 
‘the-convenient hour of 11:80 4.0. On: board, you will be 
‘served domplimentary tif fins. 


clearly the uses of the varlous 
stops. Price, aa. 2d, 


EVERYBODY'S ANTHOLOGY. 
~An anthology for every mood. 
The .boak lover and the casual 
sender alike will find within its 
sovers ~a richly varied collection 
of prose ond verse of striking in- 
serest, Price, 3s, 8d. 


- GREAT SHORT STORIES.—A: 
aotable collection of stories by 
nine masters of the short story 
form, Price 3s, 8d, 


FAMOUS. SHORT STORIES 
ANALYSED.—Includos tales by . 
Wells, Galsworthy, Walpoje, Au- 
nonler, Coppard and other great 
storytellers, with: illuminating 
commentaries, Price, 3s, 8d, 


GETTING INTO PRINT. — 
This-volume -:ts - full’ of. sharply 
ornctical guldance. for the new 
ariter drawn from the experience 
“of successful ‘huthors and Journ. 
uilsts, Price, 36. 8d, : 


MORE PROFIT FROM WRI'T- 
ING, — A vractical book fer’ 
the new writer, packed with enn- 
cise and stimulating hints on in- 
creasing acceptances, Price, 3s, 6d. 


Send Your Order 
NOW 


Post your order today to leet 
Publications (Dent. 678). 9. 
Palace Gate, London, WH) En. 
and. » Simply Wet the books your 
require and attach .the anpro. 
priate amount. All the’ books . 
are cloth bound? all prfces Include 
postage. The complete. «et of 
books can he supped for £1, 17s. 
8d, post free, - : ; 


These books will) heln vou to 
make the. most of. vourself, ta en. 
large ‘your . knowledge and to 
widen your interests. Hera is an 
Investment that will ' bring you 
amnlo. returns n= pleasure and 
profit, Post’ your. order : now. 


’ 


‘Phe.adjustable lounge chair 


“ia perfect ‘for your after-lunch .nap.. High. aloft. yaur, 
“modern liner glides in absolute’ perenity, while the mag’c 


carpet 


ast 


eet 


a 


of :China's:matoland retreats rapidly | 


beneath you." 
: we 


Lec, 


. FAST 


“Page a 7" . 


 CLASSIFIE 
_ ADVERTISING: 


#8 ,NORDE 12, 708 ONE 
FOR EACH ADDITIONAL 
INSERTION, 


‘ADDITIONAL 
WORDS 10 CTS. PER‘ WORD 


PER INSERTION, 
$2 


Replies are awaiting ot our 


B10, 24h; 846, 347, 348. 
POSITION VACANT 


male Chinese 


Must 


accurate 
typlat required. 
vod) Linglish, Apply with re. 
ferences to Phillppine — Alr 
Linen, Room 5, Peninsula Hotel. 


pais Deusen ner . 
NAVAL ¢erviceman seeks: ault- 


able employment after demobi+ 
sation in first halt of January, 


Any reasonable offer considered . 


Rox 848 “China Mall,” 
WANTED KNOWN 


HAVE La shopped at. “Bond 
Street W.1." 


DUPLICATING SERVICE. All| 


clasaes of: Duplicating work done 
accurately and quickly. Mode- 
rate Charges. NIAGARA 
DUPLICATING SERVICE, 3rd 
floor, York Bldy..- Chater Road, 
re 26774, 


ee 
NEW Winter Sulting-——Style and 
workmanship guaranteed to your 
satisfaction, Selected range. of. 
English materials. Telephone 
21366 for tailor to call—Kingts 
CAh Yun) Tailor, 4, D'Agutlar 
Street, ist Floor, 


FOR YOUR BREAKFAST, 


Tiffin, Afternoon-Tea &, Dinners} 
. You are welcome, 


Prompt Ser- 
vices Airy and Quiet. Try 
Cafe de Luxe, China Emporium 
Mezzanine Floor Tel. 26428, 
—— 

TUITION GIVEN 
ENGLISH University teacher 
rekident in) Hongkong now 
has vacancies for inseructlng 
Chinese pupils in English pro- 
nunciation and conversation, 
spelling and writing. Offers a 
fluent and confident knowledge 
of English for business and 
soclal Wife by private tuition in 
their own homes. Box 341 
“Sunday Herold”, 


WANTED TO BUY 


WANTED  hi-lingual Cookery 
Book with recipes in English & 
Cantonese. Sevond- hound copy 
nog objected to.’ Please write 
stating aveilability and’ price 
required. tox 842 “Chitta 
Mail.” . 


FOR SALE. 


POWERFUL paver} 
(8.x 80). Perfectly new, 
tonishingly cheap — §abo1 
“ZEISS” shipmasters (7 x- Op 
$226! Sent on approval—Phone 
67687 (KR—10 am.) (6—~8 p.m) 
Don't delay! 


UNDERWOOD LATEST 
MODEL just arrived. Lowest 
price. Also Typewriters for rent, 
Service yunranteed. Tel, 
Universal Typewriter  Co,, 

Des Voeux Road, C., 1st. floor, 
a 


BOSTON -¢y| 


STEAM LAUNDRY. 
BEST SERVICE 
MODERATE PRICES: 


818, WYNDHAM: ST. 
PEIPING &. TrENTSLN: |: | 
-WOOL CARPETS: 


WHOLESALE | 
OR RETAIN. 


CHE HING HONG"| 


" @B Queen's Road .C:. 1st: Bloor, 


Telephotie 24359" 
HONGKONG a egeie 


“sheets, ‘ 


i aaa ee er “heen : 


& Ivory stamp s ms 
| Street, 


offices for Box Noa: 808, 910; 


~apeak |: 


: 6% of the said surplus profits of tho 


27682. | - 


es ‘Yan 


A: copy i this. Prospectus hast Beek fled with te Replatrar. 
of Companies, 


. : : ‘ fe 
The'-subscription: will be open ‘on 6th January, 148° 
and’ close. on’ 16th January, 10948, 


_LUEN:WO LAND INVESTMENT €0:, LTB: 


(iorporated under the Hong Kong Companies 
Ordinance 1932): 

&, . _ 

i 


AUTHORIZED CAPITAL sin ieee oy she $500! ‘oud00 


DIVIDED: INTO 


aoe shares of $10.00' cach, whereof: 600 finven’ shall ve called’ S 


founders’ gharca and 49,500 shares shall be called’ ordinaty’ ‘shares. 


The founders’ shares confer on the holders’ thereat iti rit y 


from tite’ to-tlme to appoint.any person who holds 

right’ the qualificatlon of ordinary director to be rege 

of the. Compahy, but so that not moro than 7 persons nae at 
any dno time hold offlee by virtue of the appointment,- atid: suth 


appolnteo shail hold- office subject to Article 05° of’ the: Articles: of] 


Association of the’ Company,. and may at ony’ time remove’ him, 
from‘office, and any such appointment or removal shall be effected 
we notite in writitg to the general manager: of the- Company end 


“Tho foundete' shares also ‘confor on the holdars thereof the 
a, rateably ond in: ortion to the number of founders’ slar¢s’ 
by’ them’ respectively to 10% of the surplus: profits of the 
Conpenr in} eweh’ year upich shoal) remain after paying or pro: 
viding: for payment of 8% interest’ on the. capitat' pald’ up’ or 
credited “ag: peld up on the founders’ shares and: ordinary ‘sharas 
of the’ Company and the right to rank in all other respects par 
pasne with th tho ordinary shares of the Company. 


A shareholder who: holds in his own right 1,000 ordlpary 

shares! of the first issue of shares of the Company shall 2 
promoter of’ the Company, and ho shall also be a’ permanent’ dren 
tor of the’ Company until he ceases to hold 1,000 ordinary’ shares 
in’ the pier eaat or vacaten office by death, resignation, or otherwise. 


y. person who procures subscriptions for 300: ordinary shares 

of ie first {ssuc of shares of the Company shall be a promoter 

af the: Co ny, and if he holds fn his own, right at. least 50 

pea of the sald 300 shares he shall be eligible to bo elected 
as an ordinary director of the Company, 


Tho promoters of the Company shall be’ entitled to’ Be paid 
Company as bonus and 
such bonus shhlf be’ divided’ among the promoters’ in such- pro- 

portions as the promoters may agree between themselves: and in 
Fetaule of etich agréement equally. 


The qualification of an ordinary director is tho- holding in 


his own right of at least 60 ordinary shares in the capital of:|.° 
No bear” the: cost’ of clearing: and‘ filling land, road . formations, 


the Company. 


2 Upon a show of: hands every member holding founders’ share 


and present jn person ;shall have two votes, and every’ member’ 
holding at lesat 6 ordinary shares and present in person shall 
have one vote, 


Upon gs poll: every member holding founders’ shares and. pre- 
sent In person: or by proxy shall have two votes for every: fourid- 
ers’ share held by him, and every member holding 6 ordinary) py 
shares: and- present in person’ or by proxy shall’ Have’ one’ vote: 
fot pvery 6 ordihary’ shares uy to 10 ordinary shares’ ard to* an 


additional: vote’ fore every 10 ordinary shares beyond thy first: 10) = 


ofdinary shores, but’ so: that no member holding ordinary: shares 
shall Eaoeds than 100 votes each 


ip. member’ holding. less’ than 5 ordinary shares shall” barks 
thé ~ ty-attend or to vote at any general meeting or to receive 
any: notice thereof. 
ISSUE OF 


509 Founders” shates at pat, and 
1600. Ordinary sharea at par. 


Payable’ as regards the founders* snares: on- 
: appiltation ,. 


Payable. ok: regards the ordinary shares on 
appiication 


. $10.00 


per shore 


oe 
ce 


DIRECTORS 


ig. P, Ko: Po: Village, - Fanling New Terri- 
tories,» Colony. of Hong Kong 
No,.82, Fook: Wing Street, Ist flour,: 
Sharmishulpo, Kowloon; Hong, Kong: 
Panling Village, Fanling,-New Terri- 
torles,. Colony of Hong Kong. . 
Tal: Po. Tau Villaze, New. ‘Terri- 
tories, Colony of Hong Kong.’ 
‘No.5, Yan Hing J Street, Tai Po 
Market, New Tortitories, 
Colony’ of Hong Kon 5 
Sufi ‘Linn Tong Village, Fanling, 
a rsa Colony’ of 
fd 
Ma‘ Cheuk Ung: “Village, Sha Tau 
~ New’ Territories, . 


Coton of' Hong? Kong ‘ 
Pinks Youn Village; Skoungshul, 
New: ot ha a Coliny. of: 

Hoty" Katt 
Tsung Pak. Pony Village, 


Be 4). 
Kun Ying... 

tf Su HR) =~ Shoungshul, New. Territories; 

Colony of Hong Kong 


: fl 
mo svlacrrors : 
- Meiata, G3-¥. Kwan-&-Gor- -: 


No. 4h; Dodt-Voeuk- Road Central 
“Hong Kong. 
_ _ AUDIYGES 
_Maasri: Wong,, Tan E Co: 
- Charteted Accountants, 
Road Contral 
long... 


Merchant: 


Lay: To: 
Ge “* a 


mY Choi’ 


sired OFFIOEIE. 


ny ey 


‘On: Tok F Vile 2 AE i 
- olony of a Kong. | > 


olive: ay tent none pa 


” Teereoran rat ail es 
A eatin beac tpe 


a tf 
ise 


Se 2 sre: “ae 


nae by the holders of at lenst two- thirds of thé issued founders’ f 


, taining 


shops’ Dl it 


Merchant, : 
Merchant} < 


Mexchiant 3 
Meretiant F 


Merthabt i 


Kab’. piovided. in the’ 


"Mirena : 
a 


land: tne. thy mins fa asp saree | 


Fanllng and to clear, Jay out Dakine , and to payer tins roads, 
rays, iwers, aenere® atid” other iste ‘conventences. | 


newer: we't: HOR Me Ba A 


Approxiniate total area of land ‘propessd’ to: negate C0400". Be 


Reserved: for: rd : Sat 
Roads atid’ footpath: see teeseen cence seedy 208600 
Sites of 200 shops (nealing seavenging lanes) 205,400" 
site ft, 100’ covered athlls atid’ apates: for ‘oper 


avetesuscdees thor aantcoasnborrsaas tat te 
Y aie i x 


ye Open area’. 
* Approximate: total gron proposed to be developed. tere : 
ite ete. exneanicand” 


4. ESTIMATED: ivrviatOUTEA. a 
Cost: of Jand «.. . 10, 000: 00° 


20%" of the estimated: cine of $800,000.00" of | 
clearing.” and’ fillitig: eee road formatioris, 
sewers and draitiagu, Vg out: arid: prepat- 
ing sites: for shops covered atalls, open’ stalls: 
(the: Balance of 809' to‘ be borrie by ‘the’ pur-” 
ae of the. building. lots of shops) .. 


Cost: of: erecting: ‘about 100° cdvered/ stalls, Laten; : 
60,000.00" 


park, and other public cortvenieteew ........ 


6. OPTION TO- SHAREHOLDERS. 


The sites of the shops will bo laid ott and divided! it bull 
ing lots, and it {s proposed that a shareholder who holds in: hin’ 
own right 1,000’ ord pote shares of thé firat Jsaue of shares in 
the capital’ of the my shall Have the first option af pur- 
chasing 2 lots, and’ a Tieroniolder who: holds: in his own right 
800 shares in the capital of the Company shall have the’ firat 


option ‘of purchasing one lot. 


It-is -antlelpated that: when tha aiton are laid out and divided, 
all the building. lots wil}.be taken up. 


6. UNIFORMITY ,OF BUILDINGS, 


To avoid! conglomeration of alfrerent and wrsiel a: typea of 
duildfo a the Company: 4s” preparlbg plans’ an \fications., of 
the: a ballt ‘on’ the Daltding lots, and wt sable them* 
to Pol for approval. The plats: will provide for al! thé 

essential] “demarid: of Health’ ddd conivenfétiees, and: when: the plana’ 
are apprayed’ by" Governitiont, each! purchasor- of: building lot will 
be réquired! ta-‘enter into’ agreement with ‘thé Company, to build 
ithe shop: in, atrict ateordance’ with the plans and’ specifications. 


h- The porchasers of: the building lota will also bo required 


ways, sewers, drbitiage, laying’ out,- preparing building: lots id: 
‘Nghting of reads ahd’ also’ the ¢xpenses of repairing’ and- main. 
thy: ronds, whys aria’ Ughting’ “proportionately to to the areas 
‘of the bullding: lots parchesed by them respectively. : 


. 8. In orale to: piwsérve- the’ urfiformity of: the:type-of- sho! 
and to the eatly completion: of the: building. of all- 
ve pit, Pine He creo Apion Scher 
of rs of; the: ng. lots; 
on telat from Renters 1 gontractote: to’ contract’ 
hie: purchasers of Wulldintg. lots . will! be required: 
; enaits with the..Company ty’ payta: the Compatty 
oe the bullathe of beat ogo abiop, 
h - payment ma 
ar by a. amber of vite at sche ni 


a nding to the contract - 
«alt ont: 


per shate'| > 


Leds vibe etches —ahy—" B 


tee e eee edeeweenratnes 


presbit’. rir 
Weerthelede: they feel. -jast 
Lt ee) 
part ts trees sim sited 
Joe and with the: croperie 
hbabitants, we ane 10 wile “SHY the: New? Tertis: 
try. atid: co 1 of Tr apie Territories : will 


eee at ar aceon 
a 
ded In the Articles’ of Aatoctalion' as ofthe: Cai 
ff ntee eee nee 
ef tg laste fa" S100 
» of Lath): § rgd fer pret set 
ful, 


+89, ise’. datermnined ‘by =~ cant! riediling* 
; plied ot neon -ahall nt. te Ps. tha 
. dincteen “Inel permanent 


LY) Eve: oe ere: 


ceeos 


GORADO 


190,000.00 * 


‘| Be ore 


payment 
eval. a oe tha, Bip ‘ 


. —— ao | fom 


we fii DB 
: itaya hioiede 
; ef 


othe 


4 feohd-Slonttary’ Seth 1088" 


Sanne Laem wilh con oe ; 


Mex: 
OTS" 1B. ‘all 
pooktiy extludiag 
liding the’ Sterling 


The’ , tines! “CHINA! 
TG means the following 
nttodltteh— 


Wolfearti:. : 
Cotton, Yarn: 
Rapeeced: Ol Tin’ ~- 
Tea —- Antimony 
vl a 
‘aria niga eA the: » above ; «Come, 
njoditiea whitover the coutitry of 
Droduttion. 


ab Where: - the © above _com- 
firoditles*: abe of; Chiriere: Origin 
ati Export: Lcerice will orily be}. 
‘arited® pruvided’. that. a: Certl- 
te’ of Olgin: issued: by -the 
Chineid Authorities’ accom mp 
the. aero for the ‘Export 
Diten the commodities 
donde ‘NOT of: Chinese. Origin, 
proof: ‘of origin: an the 
eee iene of Impérts' ahd 
‘Expuns! deers ft’ stall’ be 
provided: 


id -Jnithe case off atocks simeady 
heid inthe Colony, it! will! not 
‘be possible: to’produce” Certificates 
‘of Opin Hg sllth' stocks’ must 
tered’ with the Imports 
apa! patty’ Department:  Re- 
einer ration’ Forms-caii ‘be-obtained 
ifrom the Manifest Office, of :the 
Imports and: Exporty: Depart- 
‘ment; groand’ fldde, Fire Bilgade’ 
\Bailding, ‘frbe of. charge. Re- 
Ristration: ‘forma mitiat- be: “com 
leted’ atid? handed. in the 
mports add! Exports Digkttinent 
babes, 6 pim,-on Friday, January 
Oth 1948; No registration 
a aad can be atéepted after that 
late, 


t shettld. be- noted.-that ne}: 
Kt Licetice will be’ given’ for’ 
Ubregistetea' stocks -of the above 
cOnimodities: of | CHinese: origin 
unlegs'.n Certificate of, Origin is 
‘prodaced; 


‘6. Alpplichtlon: for the’ export 
oe cube Bane sind 
rin 2B° (ye! ow) ini 
‘dUptteatt; except’ in. the:case’ of}: 
t]i_ and’ wood o}};. which- should 
en form 2A (green) in 
stiplicate tO! thé: office’ of | Mr. 
avis on the 2nd: floor of! the 
Fire Brigade Building. 
1% Tn cnad* ofs diffeulty ‘phone 
Me, Davis, (89248, i 


° 


EX. : 


| Cheers F 
urma- 


4 


nN 


’ 


in: 
NN few outs 


Ravi 
Sir, Hube Rance, ‘ghoulaat 
M ea downriver fare 


in the af thous 9f'e river 


wat bt ae labt aire a. 


"Governor of 


Obie thre- : 


aa serew 


earlier 1 Sit Hubert). as. repr sentative 


. King Géprge VI, hirided: ‘over power:to the 


fis 


ernment House: 


‘The 


Brosident of: the Burmese’ ‘Republic; Sao - 
e Thaik, at # solemn: ceremony at Gov- 


Constituent Awsimbly ‘building | first -Ambasantlor,. Maurie: Gyee,- 


wos now 
‘HMS* Birtliighars; on: its:. why 
ta -Hritain, where’ it: will 
one In jesse British Muscim: It]. 
had. beert replaced: by’ the red, 
blue and white’ stamspangled 
aaa of the Burmese _Repub- 
le. 

When: power was formally 
transferred, lorry loadsof: Bur- 
mans; waving their national co. 
-lours, pataded’ the clty. streeta,; 
cheering, waving’ flags and 
alnging: national songe. : 
' Temple bella rang out from 
all: sides;.- 
in the: streets: ahd ships ard 
factories: on the-river front 
sounded their horns; 

Meanwhile, the Republic's 
Cabinet’ was nieceting. to‘ thke 
‘the oath df ‘offlée and- Parlia- 
ment was ratifying the treaty 
with Britain. 
‘ The Prime Minister, Thakin 
Nu, presented the Anglo-Burm- 
ent treaty to- Parliament,: ex: 
plaincd: {tx vital: provisions: and 
moved’ its ratification. 
} zh Coniminist Party, which 

s° seven: ‘members in the. 

Novos of: ne pposed’ the’ rat!: 
ficatiori ‘of ': the 
they described. as. 
the. interests of’ the’ Burmese 
masses — to’ allen’, capitalist 
domination.” 1 7 

They strongly’ éritieized! the |* 


be| terms of the defence'avreerient' 


and’ the financial ‘atrangerient, 
: THe Defence Minlater, Co: 
‘tanal: Bo. Jet Ya,. a the 
Home. Minister, U. © Kyeln; 
‘aaruied the: terms'‘of the: treaty.|-th 
‘metioned! by’ the: Corttitinists 
P ‘ The tréaty was fiitally’ rat! 
‘flea uy an’ overwhelming’ “major- 


‘ity. 
Eondon Cerettiony .. 
" Meantime, in London; as‘ aun: |i 
‘|. shine’ streanied’ dowy of: their 


f Be | | 
‘patriots;. together. with: prom}. 


nent--world: figures, celebrated 


HONG KONG a inet GO.,. LTD. 
NOTICE, 


ice 


Owing @ the: present tians port: difficulties and! the. need: 


to’! i an. it's. men on ¢ssential- work: it..will not- be: posaible- 

a to distribute the Telephone . Directo 
Subserlbers are: therefore- requested: to: calk-, 

"a: Offices, : Exchange! Building, Des . Voeux - Rodd, 


sag) oH 


e wl act out below to collect. chelr Directories: 
totlen: Wi ra A be Sssued: on- production of: the:.Com- 


of thes a irectory.- 


Direetsilex foe Government: 
ont Mantis’ Generh}.. 


Directaty Distitiation: ; 
“Tatinaty ane Telephone Numbers" 20000‘t0" atog"” 


" 
" 
ne 


‘ws 


wil oily . 


is” Se! e. 


ee the’ current’ es rentals’ and: on 


Service" will be avin ‘by’ | 


22000 te 2aseo* 


STOO" to” Brags 
5BO00- to BSED8 


be- tanyred: to: subseribets:..on . the 
une and. if a‘ subscriber is uhable! to ‘collect. 
that. day he. should not abp 


8 ungll 
until ‘Tuesday’ yf 20th Senanty. 


Bills 
shier 


ard. 
D Chief a 
e ame nt Accoutts 


crackers were fired! 


ear which: 
eer) Bolly if 


‘| friendatiip 


Hon, ong 


‘stowed ‘on bonrd| taised ‘hisreountiry’s" star-abahi 


led — tridolout “"to'-“the’ 'mivat= 


o'| head of: the: Butnitse Embassy. 


'. Inside the ' bHght;’ gildéd- 
chamber ofthe: Burmese Eni: 
bassy ‘in’. London; members! of 
the = diplomatic’ '' tervices: * ‘of: 
most of tho world's” tations 
heard! Sir Stafford: Cripps;' the, 
Chancellor of the Exchey lire 
ony ofthe chiof ‘urthitecti Of 
the: Burniese. sottlemont—pledgé 
Britain:to an.‘ era’ ‘of clone. 
with independent 
Burinai 


British rule | 


Union: Jack, that ha iho iranieen of power to’ Birth i: 
fluttered from the must: of: the} bt-a chremony:' 


' “It fs our hope,” ‘he! told: the | 
distinguished gathering,: “tht 


Burk will. go from” strength 
to strength; sqtting ai’ exathple’ 
tothe people of’ Asia of f' great 
‘docial. “democratic — republid,- 
stable ‘and prosperous, dtvelop- 
ing hor own regotrces for thé 
good: of her people and of tHe 
whole’ world. - 

‘ “In that progréss, we’ mh¥ 
continue: to” be: privileged by 
het-friendship dnd that’ of her 
people and we may,: by ‘oii# own. 
knowledge and experfence: bo 
ablé ‘to: make some contribution 
tovher develapment,”—Reutor, ~ 
ear Sanaa ama tee canta! 


—— 


THE HONG-KONG, 
CANTON. & MACAO 


STEAMBOA 

COMPANY, BO aEED. 
Notice: To Shareholders 
; pNOtige 2 is’ heraby: givea that . 

PRED *‘gnd_ 
PY THIRD. ORDINARY, 
ME: Lee of Shareholders in. 
he Compariy, will: be jield* at 
‘the Office of’, the Compan: 
Seng von i rit, 
‘ong .Kong,. on’ Monday i 
Wanuaty, 1948; at’ NOON, for 


tHe patpose’ of! rekelvinig. ‘h Re 


{port of the Director, | together” 
with a Statement of? Accounts in 
Teapect icf 1946 ‘and Re-electing 
;Directors and Auditors, 


‘By Order’ of the Bourd of 
irectors, . 


H. Dacnuz, 
Secretary.: 


: 2th Dee, 1947, 


ay 


' SALE OF SEXTANTS. 


: tans fe io ter ig 
purchase of: surplus’ Naval’ 
exthinta’’ now” i; 


ying at H. 


M. 
oe Hong Kong. : 


‘ Pender Forms amt. peririlasion 


#3 ‘view cain -be-obtained from 


ection: IC of the Naval Stora 
epartment, «<FbM, © ‘Dockyard, 


jong , Kong, between 9'a.m, and 


. | 12; noon, 


2 pnt. ‘and 4 pim 


it'which? Butma'n— 7 


esday’ to Thursday, 6th to Sth: F 


January, ant 
BBs. 


ary deet bs 


PIBHER; 


y Supedg. Naval" Store. Officer, 


SALE WY TENDER 

“Tenders are invited for tha 
potchase of 18°Nv Welding etc 
Goneratorg, "as power ‘hathanw, 
pdwer unit ‘and a Zeylinder 
“pump at! pretent! lying’ at HM" 
Dockyard; Hong’ K 


t 
‘4 
wi 


On. 


fender forms \permisaion. ta 
ard aubthor particulars: 


be obtained: oni' application -. : 


Section 2C,Naval‘Store: Dent.,: 
HUM, Dockyard, Hong, ‘Kon, 
80. a, 
Maha “pTi—406. 
Monday, “Tdeeday. an 
i 6th~Tth’, Janivar 


i) 


SHOWING 
TO-DAY 


3 pea pes SY re ee ihre as brit led 
+e 


AT 2.80, 5-10 
; 7.20 & 9.30 P.M. 
ad 
Sho Singat 
Sho Dances?. 
Sho's Terrific? 


y 


; ‘Hane PUT mat as ad 
i “eo EVERETT HORTON:ADELE JERGENS 
: é * GEORGE MACREADY. WILLIAH, FRAWLEY: 


Directed by ALEXANDER HALL 


A DON HARTMAN PRODUCTION 
Soa cokes oe Tne 


NEXT “CHANGE ena 


That Scandalous London Hussy Sweeps To The Screen! 


Seraight from the daring pages ofthe 
-sensational novel yotl've heard about! 


Paramount preseau 


Kitty 


Paulette GODDARD 
Ray MILLAND 
a Mitchell Leisen roovcnon 


with Patric Koowtes © Cecil KaUeway 
Regioald Owen ¢ Constnace Collioe 


_ At 2.0, 6.15, 
TAG & 915 PLM. 


SHOCKING 
asitis — 
SENSATIONAL 


when 
VENGEANCE 


strikes! 
Cruul,.. Puthless 
«Hated... as _ 
ony killer with a 
gun in his hand! 


MITCHELL 


mMaRY 


ANDERSON 


BRUCE 
HUMBERSTONE - 
Progeced by BEN SILVEY 


5 SHOWS DAILY 
_ FINAL EPISODE 
At 12.30, 2.30, 5.15,.7.15 & 9.15 p.m. 


“SPOTTED BUTTERFLY” 


A CHINESE PICTURE 


TKACHENKO’S . 


RESTAURANT & CONFECTIONARY 
3, Hankow Road, Gr. & Ist floor, Kowloon. 


many famous & delicious Russian Dishes. 


The ONLY Resl Russian Restaurant in the Colony serving the 


Always in ack a varied assortment of Vodkn, 
Beer and Liqueurs, served with or without, food. 


Whisky, Wines , 


THE CHINA MAIL, TUESDAY, JANUARY, 3; 1948. 


TRUMAN'S CALL TO CONGRESS 


Need To Act “With The Utmost wo 


Reiteration Of 
Old: Demands 


Washington, Jan. 4. 


= [President Truman today put the finishing touches 


e lengthy. “State of the Union” mcr 
in which he is expected to warn Con 


Wednesday that they will be failing 
leadership unless the 


world 
act “with the utmost 


urgency” to end inflat on at home and to give 
a start to erennies reconstruction in Europe. 


|These will be t 


hii, 
le islative. demante Ww 


political “platform h 


elections, as. well as settin 
. some of the most important 


tory of Congress. 

White House sources disclosed 
toduy that President Truman, 
undetermined by Republican op- 
position: to his ecarher propcsals, 
will refterate his demand for the 
control of wages and prices and 
powers to restore raticning as the 
only way to halt the inflationary 
«plral which, if unchecked, might 
end jin a serious depression be- 
fore unother 12 months are out. 

The inéxtricable link between 
the stabillty of United States 
cconomy and the effort to begin 
Europtan reconstruction on an 
orderly basis will alzo be stressed 
in the President's troditfonal 
message to the assembled Senators 
and Congressmen. 


Truman Views 
+ What the programme will be fs 
pretty well known and White 
Huse sources sald that President 
Truman will make it clear: 
Thot he believes that reli. 
un voluntary =measures— 
Republican leadership 
strongly esnousts—to beat Infla- 
tion ts wholly inadequate to cope 
with what he considers an 
“alarming” situaticn, 
2. That anv attempts to delav 
the Marshal) Plan beyond March 
41 next, seriously to reduce its 


DANCE AT 
THE 


LIDO DANCING HALL 
144-148 Des Voeux Rd. 4th fir. 
Side Entrance 


FINE DANCING FLOOR 
. GOOD MUSIC. 


FRIENDLY ATMOSPHERE 
NEWLY DECORATED 
BEST SERVICE 


~ TAR 


Phone 58335 
2.30, 5. 30, 7.80 & 9.30p.m. 
TO-DAY ONLY 


"SUMMER 


Neoatsice 


ANAL CRLLy 
CORAEE AILOE 
Wal ARE 
ALA Eth 
ARTE DANY 


To-morrow, One Day Only 
“SONG OF ; 
MUSKETEER” 


» 4 starring 
Don Ameche & The Ritz Brog. 


TOR 
WATHAN RO TEL 50100 ~ 


SHOWING TO-DAY 


“ALONG THE 
RIVER BANK” 


Chinese Pictura 
in MANDARIN. 


SN 


r 


“JANE” . 


Classical Music « every Night (Ist floor) ; 


OUR CONFECTIONARY. hee. always. a. large azgortment of in 


kes, Cookies and Sweets on displ ay. 


\ 
te r ‘ 
DAILY TIFFIN ey DINNER 

from 12.00 a.m. wo, SP to 8,00 p.m. 
For Reservations: 


hone 50550 °' 


hts of the President's 
ich will constitute his 
tor next November’s 
the pattern for 
ebates in the his- 


totals of werken its administra- 
tion, or any move to avcid com- 
mitting the United States for the 
whole four-years period and the 
$17,000 million amount, will hav 
the m:at serious repercussions, 

There arguments Will be under- 
lined by Mr. George Marshall, th- 
Secretary of State, and Mr. Lewis 
Douglas, Ambassador in London, 
when they testify before the 
Senate Forelun Relations Com- 
mittee next Wednesday cer Thurs- 
day. 

cee this Is election year 
atid “because foreign nid and in- 
fintion are the two Issues exnect- 
ed to dominnte that contest, they 


‘hkewise will make up the bulls 


of President Truman's message. 


Aid For China 


He ts expected also to pripose 
on additional programme of ald, 
totalling about $300,000,000, for: 
China and to call once mere for 
legislation to outlaw raciat dis- 
crimination tn the giving of jobs, 
education and voting privileges. 

He $s also expected to renew 
the plea for an increase in the 
immigration quotas for displaced 
persons from Europe to about 
100,0000 « year.—Reuter. 


Senator’s 


Senator William F. Know] 
can, demanded today 


ment disclose whether there ts 


KIDS’ PARTY 
TRAGEDY 


Atchbold, Ohio, Jan. 5. 

The. State Highway Patrol . 
today reported that 10 chil- 
dren wero when a 
speeding New York train 
crashed into a sicightng ~- 
party at a grade crossing. 

First reports from the 
sceno of the crash sald the 
train strock o tractor and 
bobsled combination,  kill- 
ing ten children outright- 
and sending ‘two others to 
hospital. 

Communications , have 
been cut because of the re- 
cent ke  storm.— United 
Press. 


Another 
Malayan 
Piracy ~ 


Singapore, Jan. 5, 
Masked pirate raiders, with 
guns blazing, hijacked a Chin- 
ese coastal vessel last night In 
the Straits of Malacca. It was 
the second act of piracy‘ within 
a week in Malayan waters. 


The narrow straits, which + separate 
Malaya from Sumatra, have been the 
Jair of pirmter since the days nf 
Portuguese frecbootern, 

A shipping company spokesman 
said all Singapore passenger ships 
calling at Chinese ports henceforth 
will carry armed guards, 

The current flare-up of piracy in 
southern Asiatic waters was climac- 
ed three weeks aga with the sacking 
of the Dutch passenger ship Van 
Heutz off Hong Kong.—Associated 
Press, 


Demand 


On Reparations 


Washington, Jan. 5. 
and, California Republi- 
that the State Depart- 
ny secret big 


three agreement promising Russia a substan- 


Le al poxtion of dismantled Japanese industrial 


K Berne wrote acting Secre- 
lary of State Robert. A. Lovett. 
asking for “information regard- 
ing commitments made to other 
nations af to reparations from 
‘he Japanese economy and 
where such agreements were 
made. 

“T would like to have an over- 


all figure of the total repara- 


lien nmounts under considera- 
tion, together with the tentative 
breakdown of allocations to the 
USSR, China, Australia and 
any other countries considered 
possible recipients for repara- 
tions payment,” Knowland said. 
The Californian, who has 
protested vigorously against 
the shipment to Russia of dis- 
mantled German industrial 
plants, told a reporter he has 
reascn to believe that some 
agreement may have been made 
at thd Yalta, Teheran or Pots- 
dam conferences to give the 
Soviets a “substantial” amount 
of similar cquipment from Ja- 
pan, wae 


Winston Fully 
Recovered 


Markaresh, Jan. 4; 
Mr. Winston Churchill ap- 
peared in the public restauran: 
of his hote) here today for the 
first time since his iJIness be- 
an 


Mra. ‘Churchill, thelr. daugh- 
ter Sarah, and tho family 
physician, Lord Moran, whe 
flew here yesterday, were with 
bis at a Jams. dinner party 

G G Ba 5 UBUG 


ner table. 


“If we ure dismantling plants 
in Japan and furnjshing the 
Russians with vital industrial 
materials and machinery there, 
addition to what we have 
given them in Germany, we 
ought to have our heads ex- 
amined,” Knowland declared. 


He udded that if any secret} 


agreement is turned up, he will 
lead efforts to have it voided. 
He has contended that German 
plant shipments to the Russians 
should be halted on the grounds 
that the Soviets have violated 
cther portions of the Potsdam 
agreement,—Asaocinted Press. 


— NEXT CHANGE 
AT THE 


CHARLES * 


R. ROGERS 
resents 


The hotel head waiter com-| ; 


mented that “Mr. Churchill hax 
rogained his appetite today. He 
ia obviously better.”—Reuter, 


HOW | ADMIRE YoOuR. 
BEAUTIFUL ESTANCIA~ 


‘YOUR LOVELY HORSES— 


YOUR SPLENDID HERD . 


THAT gatasten 
SINCE YOU HAVE | 
BEEN MY GUEST— 


Dock Fire 


Raging 


In Saigon 


JALHAMBRA & LEE 


~~ THEATRES -—— 
m. 230, Biya os 


DAILY AT 
2.20, een Sos a0. 


Paris, Jan. & .j. ; 


- The French News Agency sald 


gon, 
the destruction of 40,000 tous 


in fighting 


the despatch said that a co- 
‘umn of smcke rose more than 
3,000 fect above tho city and 
that Saigon and ita suburbs 
were covered by a dense pal. 
of smoke. : 
OMicials said at: Icast 2,000 
tons of. rubber stored nearest 
the area of the fire were cer- 
tain to be destroyed and that 
other stocks were menaced. 
- French cargo ships and one 
Russian frelghter in .the port 
were ‘protected from the blaze 
the Agency said.—Assoclated 
Presa. 


Film Stars. 
In Baton 


Charge 


Paris, Jan. 4. 
Truncheons swinging, police 

sharged a crowd of  severa! 

thousand film stars and tech- 


nicians who were _ blocking 


‘traffic in the Place de La Re- 
| publique here this afternoon, In 


Q protest demonstration agains‘ 
the) ~Franco-American film im. 
dortation agreement. 

Several people were injure¢: 
and nearly -n dozen yere arrest 
ed during the fighting, the po- 
‘ice reperted. 

In the past year, French film 
production dropped 25 p2r cent 
with a resulting 60 per cent in. 
grease in the industry’s unem- 
ployment, 

The second largest industry 
in France before the war, with 
an average annual production 
cf 120 films, it produced only 
74 pictures in 1947 os againat 


-|Q4 in 1946.—Reuter. 


‘ ANGLO-DANISH 
TALKS 


London, Dec. 4. 

A Danish trade mission arrived 
here today from Copenhagen for new 
Angio- Danish trade talks which be- 
gin tomorrow, 

The mission includes representa- 
tives of agricultural, industrial and 
commerciat interests and Government 
experts, 

The = previous negotiations broke 
down fast September when Britain 
was unwilling to pay what the Foor 
Minister, Mr, John Strachey deserib- 
ed as ney prices” for Danish dairy 
products.—-Reuter. 


Be 25 


THE 
STRANGE 


a “as! 


wea 
a 
7 


. 


THE NEW TL ahERoR? 
STUART ERYMIN + JOHKNY MITCHELL + Net DONNELLY © LOUIS ARMSTRONG | 


Dirncted byYVINCENT SHER 


MAN ano wis orchestra | 


Final Showings To-Day: 2. 20, 5. 15, 7.20 & 9.20 P.M. | 
A THRILL SWEPT. STORY OF wicidusehleteae 


roa, WELLS 


COLUMBIA PICTURES presents - 


COMMENCING}, _ 
TO morrow ! THE YELLOW: CANARY! 


tet te 


AT 2.30, 5.20,. 
7.20 89.20 pm. 


At 2.30, 5.20, ° 
720 & 9.20 p.m.. 


THE SCREEN’S FIRST GREAT’ DRAMATIC MUSICAL! 


YOU HAVE A DATE WITH. 


A’ pAcpe babtahehe PICTURE! 
Fin peboetoapa 
count PICTORES peesenrs 


Ae HAYWORTHy ‘ 


‘CHANGE oo: 
* Yvonne _DECARLO *° 


‘Don't, nt aay BE t.... 


Brian 


» “SONG OF SCHEHERAZADE” 


“== IN-TECHNICOLOR * 


DRY-CLEANING ‘& 
INDE of ‘QLOTHES rt Cc 
your order. and:‘we. will; 


val 
Prempt: and’ Satistectory 


“A UNIVERSAL “PICTURE—~- 


VEIN of ALL 
ARPETS, 


BS) 
FFICB: 180 NA Al 
”* AFROM: BRAN 


ee eee 
TRANS-ASIATIC AIRLINES... _? 


Windsor tiouse 


Editor-in-Chief: —W. J. Keotes. 
Busincks Manager: W. H. Nolloth. 


Telephones: 
EdItora cases ecccesernre 24354 
Reporters & General OMce 82912 
(four Ines) : 
Subscription Rates: 
3 months ... H.K.$18.00 


a LL) ethan 


NEXT FLIGHT: 
RONG KONG TO MANILA . . Tuesday, 6th January 


b peavinG ath 1948, 


DIRECT CONNECTIONS FOR CAIRO, PARIS, LONDON, 
‘ALL EUROPEAN CAPITALS, NORTH AND SOUTH AMERICA. 


FARK HONGKONG /PARIS £170-0-0. 


THROUGH TICKETS ISSUED AND FREIGHT 
ACCEPTED TO ALL DESTINATIONS. 


ca at 
For Particulars Apply To 


' CIE DES MESSAGERIES MARITIMES 


Queon’s Bullding ' Tel. 26051 (three lines). 


“TIME MEANS MONEY TO BUSINESS 
NON-STOP FLIGHT 
Hongkong--Shanghai__ 

: Wednesday--Friday--Sunday 


Departure Hongkong 11.00 a.m. 


FARE H.K.$350 ONLY 
Luxurious Aircraft 
Stewardess Service 


‘ew! 
HONGKONG 
TO 


i . 

. (FARE) 
Daily Service Except 

SOOMONTS IN, — sissenseeamtarcescasaceeesees HKS180.- 

os voce wageMfon., Tues, Thurs, Pei & Sat. 

‘CHUNGKING o. Saturday ese 

,» Wednesday. reat 


tor Pusonge aod Freight apply to:— 

CHANGES IN’ > 
an vceasion attended by celebra- 
calling for the establishment _ of 

FOR SAIGON WEDNESDAY JANUARY 
territory, the great centres of 
newly-founded Parliament sittiny: 
the British, French, Dutch and 
that the dissensions aroused by the 
call for the highest administra- 
ues, & Thurs. vs still the occasion for acute anxicty. 


ROUTH EAST ASIA TRADING CO. (SIAM) Ltd. 

69, Connaught Road West. Tel. 24292. THE EAST 

ney -)) ‘The unchanging East, as an 

or FAR EAST AVIATION co., LTD. - expression of an idea, no doubt 

irop, Floor, National. City Bank’ of N:¥. Bldg. Tel. 27200. had at one time a sound-and solid 
Ai F 

ur ra2ance- tions in Rangoon and London, 

marking the transfer of power, 

and the mutual attitude of good- 

will at the beginning of an_ex- 

an interim = government for the 

SEATS AVAILABLE Dutch East Indices, secking to end 

the ferment in that area in the 

effort tw effect anew relationship 

foreign interests, Shanghai, Tien- 

tain and the other Treaty ports, 

avhich were havens of peace in a 

disturbed world, have now passed 

in a chair donated to Ceylon by 

members of the British House of 

Commons, India has for some 

months been split into two Do- 

Portuguese were the carlicst pro- 

tagonists. “The rule for which 

they battled among themselves is 

being surrendered voluntarily, 

new constitutional forms in Ma- 

Jaya will yield to expericnce of 

their worth. But war-shattered 

Burma begins — its independence 

tive qualities from the new rulers 

if Burma is to survive, except. as 

a menace to the peace of the 

Eastern world. lf, when the 

: sevonsenreere 400.— There the hopes of a peaceful 

_UUCCHOW. += 200.- | division of the country were fol- 

HA HA ally Se lowed first by the terrible inci 

8 NGHAL ere ee dents attending the transfer of 


LONG KONG TO BANGKOK .,.....- Tucsday, 6th January 
HONG KONG TO MANILA . Friday, Sth January BA-$18-00 
SONG KONG TO BANGKOK... Friday, 9th January bate ioued ++ BK 372.00 
roceccseseeseeeeorevece® 
: hasia. Hardly since the conclu- 
Entrance on Duddell Street). Kowloon Tel: 57185 sion of the Prcific War. On 
Sunday, Burma became an inde- 
pendent nation, terminating her 
connection with the British Com- 
YE munwealth of Nations, It was 
LAr 
: i y, (FRENCH OVERSEAS AIRWAYS) 
7 HONGKO NG/SAIGON periment which “isnot ste 
4 heavy problems for the new Bur- 
a WEEKLY AIR SERVICE mese Governintnt., Yesterday, it 
; ARRIVALS EVERY FRIDAY 2.00 P.M. was announced from Batavia aha 
0 ay °T ¢ na the Netherlands Premier, t 
i DEPARTURES EVERY SATURDAY 6.30 AM. Beel, had offered a new proposal, 
: ADDITIONAL AIRCRAFT 
satisfactory alike to the people of 
Holland and of Indonesia. In 
China, where the sovereignty of 
the National Government is grave- 
ly threatened bv the Communist 
incursions into great arcas of its 
hack into the hands of the Chi- 
nese Government. Karly next 
month, Ceylon will pass from the 
status of a Crown’ Colony to that 
of a Dominion within the Em- 
pire, with “the Speaker in its 
minions, the Indian Union and 
Pakistan, The Fast enters upon 
the New Year seething with 
change, a change that gocs with 
the drawing to a close of a long 
struggle for dominion in which 
thaugh not always in the condi- 
tions ident for the transfer of 
power, Ceylon will start its new: 
career in peace and with a large , 
miensure of accord = among its | 
population, “There is also hope 
with serious internal — challenges, 
with much of the country in-a 
disturbed state, and with rival 
© | Communist “Governments” still 
holding sway in at least three dis- 
tricts. These are conditions that 
fires of an insurgent nationalism 
have died down, Burma seeks 
356 outside aid, without which her 
resources cannot be developed, it 
300.- [will be willingly given, 
Equally conditions in India are 
 BWATOW | o.comceTucs, Fri. & Ait ooeccsesenceeseeeree EEO populations in the ust ce 
- (AINAN Mon, & TRUPB. .....eceeseerceneseeere BOO jnow'by fighting in mir that 
: — ae “| retains the dimensions of a con- 
FREE BAGGAGE ALLOWANCE 30 KILOS siderable war, © Whether tie: 
et FFICES:— cutsion of the tribal - forces has 
o CES: by Pakistan, as 


ee evenevees 


WOO! : been encouraged 
id . India alleges in her approach to 


= a the United Nations, or whether, 
Lobby * as is more. probable, Pakistan’ has 

tea 50988) = {not available to. her the force 
—- that could have held it in check, 

it would appear to be imperative 

= Jthat the two  -Dominions should 
reach agreements as to the future 
allegiance of Kashmir if the clash 
is not to involve much of north- 
‘lem India. Grave, anxicty. mus: 
be catised by the withdrawal of 


:, HONGKONG 
' Ghell House 


You owe your eyes, something! 
maeak-overy now tisin. tiny Po: the Pakistan forces ftom the 


“(hey work “fo hard to: a : , 

musclég"t6"the Mmit-" “And they change inevitably with ae. 

=i protesntonal service is preventive as often ‘as corrective.) 
. Gousult at the first suggeation oftrduble a 


’ 


ward frontier posts, since the’ tr 
though Moslems, are 
swayed by re- 
ions if the way 


HE CHINA MAIL, TUESDAY, JANUARY 6, 1948. 


Delivery of that outsize 
Christmas present the Marshall 
‘Plan ia delayed. for a few 
months. 

The people are sorry about 
this, as they were all ready to 
wrap it in shining gift paper, 
decorated with dollar aigns and 
stars-ond-stripes. 

But there has to be some 
neceasary democratic debate 
discussion and a little arithme 
tic among the politiclans before 
the 17,000,000,000-dollar super- 
present can be dispatched. 


A Costly Gift 


The great gift, therefcre. 
may be a little Inte, but it is 
coming. It has been bought 
with American carnings, ' with 
the cents and dimes and. quar- 
ters of our friends here, and it 
will cost the nation three per 
cent, of ita income—a Jot to 
spend on a present. 

Few begrudge it. The U.S. 
knows It cannot prosper inde 
finitely if its neighbours and 
customers go bankrupt’ and 
hungry. i 

Today, there ix a good deal of 
soul-searching and conscience-, 
prebing, : . 

Seeing the stacked counters, 


. 
. 


Tho nation’s stomach, about 
te receive turkey, plum pudding, 
mince - pie, tangctrincs,” nuts. 
raisins, fhocolate cake, all 
washed down with beer, bour- 
bon, or champagne, rumbled 
with distress. 

Dye In THe Sky 

New York itself resembled. a 
vast and towering forest. of 
Christmas trees. 

Thourands of buildings wero 
festconed: with fairy lamps, and 
there were strings’ of coloured 
Ughts and glistening stars in 
most squares and avenues, 

_ The city was all light and 
aparkle. From the top of the 
Empire State Building. the 
world’s tallest. a carillon, the 
world’s biggest, rang out with 
such power that nen-New York- 
ars 16 miles away could hear 
the music. fi 

I found it slightly deafening,: 
and preferred the jingle of 


the groaning shelves, the moun-| . 


tnine of food, clothes, and 
yoods, the shoppers thought 
uneasily of the bare larders of 
Europe, They think particular- 
ly of the British, their staun- 
chest friends, the people 
who made the millionaires’ 
Christmas here possible. 


Plum Pudding 


There has been a lot about 
the British Christmas in the 
American Aewspapers and on 
‘he radio programmes and it 
has made Americans wince and 
flush. 

The U.S. has been told of the 
bleak raticns, the harrowing 
struggle for scraps, the ‘short- 
agee of toys for the children, the 
lack of meat and drink, 


106 Yeats 
Cge 


(From the files of the 
"China Mail’) 

From the Imperial © Commis~ 
sioner, Governor-Gencral of Two 
Kwang, &c. to His Britannic 
Majesty's Plenipotentlary: — 

“I om in receipt of your des- 
patch of the 22nd of the 9th moon 
(6th Novembtr), by which I_am 
informed of the particulars of an 
attack mode upon the pirates in 
tht waters of Cochin-China, by 
the Steam-crulsers of Your Ex- 
cellency’s Nation, which, with the 
cooperation of the Officers of 
Cochin-China, who cut off their 
re’reot, had been enabied to burn 
almost the entire pirate flect; n7 
more than 6 vessels of the 3rd 
and 4th class having made their 
escape. This will indeed gindden 
the hearts of all men. 

“Although Shih-wu-tsze (Shap- 
ng-tsal) has for the time delayed 
the blow of the sword of punish- 
ment, now that he js as a fish in 
the bottom of the kettle, there 
will be, I tmagine, no difficulty 
in Cf piggeer eee him. 

“With reference to what your 
letter further says upon the In- 
security of the River within and 
without the Bogue, o searching 
inquiry has shown that the fisher. 
men and beat population of the 
Jocality; in. question, when there 
is no grent quantity of fish to be 

nken, soiz® the oppottunity to 
thieve and rob. It can nardiy by 
said that thin is never the case: 
but they certainly do not band 
their craft t-gether in fleets, 

“Besides, there. is no parallel 

the 
Bogue, 
the sea-bo 


worthw! 


aevere 
Your 
*Adveriing 


than wha 
common law. 


Salvation Army girls’ bells on 
Fifth-avenye and the deep voice 
of St. ick’s Cathedral: in 
midtown. 

There was a special Merry 
Christmas Land in Grand Cen- 
tral-place, presided over by ¢ 
6ft. Tin, Santa Claus—of ccurse 
the world’s largest. 

Nothing was stinted. Nev 
York was shooting the works 


and the fireworks this Christ- 


mas almost as if it were the 
last celebration to be held on 
earth. 

Nylon stockings, slips, and 
lingerie by the million. 
There was a tremendous run on 
jewellery, real and costume, 
handbags, party dresses, men’s 
ties and pyjamas, 


One spectacular shopper 


b. 
a EEL ES TEED 


THE 
AMERICAN . 
SCENE 


bought a aflver. fox carpet for o 
D4ft, room at .a ecat of £8,000. 
But most New Yorkers can- 
tincd: themselves to spending not 
more than £10 0n themselves 
and their friends. 
Politics and politicians, Imdn't 
& chance. Mr, Honry Wallace 
formed a Third Party, forget- 
ting that too many pnrtics cause 
‘Kfingovers, In fashions, hus- 
bands advised their wives to 
wear skirts os long as they last. 
Last year I sent out over 2,- 
900 Christmas cards to people 
tn England. This time, be- 
cause of dollar shortage, I 
haven’t sent any. | 
There have been o- grent 
many Christmas parties theae 
Inst few days. At El: Morocco, 
the Stork Club, the Twenty-one, 
and at private houscs, but the 
truth is I have been desperate- 
ly homesick. 7 


Film City Blues 

Christmas found Hollywood 
subducd. Its biggest produc- 
ticn slump for the past six 
years has shuttered many 
studio lots and laid off thou 
sands of workers. 

Only 20 pictures are being 
filmed, just now in Helywood— 
4 70 per cent, drop. 

Altogether it has” been 
worrying year for producers 
and financial backers. The net 
tnke for 1947 will be 16 per 
cent. below 1946, and an even 
higger slide is expected during 
next year. 

Most companics are planning 
ambitious productions in 
Europe to get cver the, dollar 
hurdle, The cost of making films 
in Europe is much less than in 
Hollywood, where materin] and 
labour are priced so high, 


Hues Misuse 
Even Christmas trees 
more in Hollyweod than any- 
where else in the U.S. Shop- 
keepers asked from 7s. Gd. to 
£1 a foot, and the trees run 
big in the West. They could be 
bought in any colour: blue, 
pink, yellow, silver, gold, black, 
or startling whitc—anything, in 
fact, except natural green. 
Some of the singing stars— 
Bing Crosby, Frank Sinatra, 
and Lily Pons—scnt personal 
Christmas greetictys on special- 
ly made gramophone reccrds. I 
don’t think the idea’is particu- 
larly appealing. ; 
Johnny Weissmuller is going 
to England and announces that 
ne will swim the English Chan- 


a 


cost |. 


| CARNIVAL. 


(pA? BY WEA SERVE, IWC. T, M. REO. U. w PAT, or, 


. ° . 2 
“Sho’s developed an ontiroly different personality since’ 
sho saw that psychintrist!” 


irgun Zvai Leumi 


Turn The Clock Back 


Jerusalem, Monday. But’ I doubt whether they 
ateel—helmeted “shock | will order thelr Hagonoh Militia 
of Irgun Zvai Louml,|{to wipe. out Irgun before the 
using cast-off British Army |cycle of reprisakvand counter- 
trucks, wearing atolen ‘British | ceprinal begins to “bsin too fast 
Army uniforms, fully cquipped|te be arrested. 
with mortars, machineguns,| The truth ta that not oll the 
bombs, and rifles, have opened | Jewish leaders want tho end of 


sae oun orev against the 

oly Land’s 1,260,000 Arabs. 

On Saturday alone Irgun Kill- , By J. L. HAYS 

ed 20 Arnba and wounded nenr-[frgun whom they sect as a 
ly 100. : + | pogsible ally. 

Irgun havo turned the clock] They say: “After the Britlsh 
back to 1985, when they an-|have gone, when the Arabs at- 
swered every bomb of the Arnb/tack in full strength, when 
anata wits Mawer Aue better| there might bo a real war, we 
ombs of thelr own, 1 : y 

Then, o8 now, the Jewish pel i a 
Agency and the men who have 
become known as tho leaders of 
moderate Jewish oplaton con- 
demned Irgun’s. reprisals. 


: THE 
troops 


Make no miatake, in a military 
senge Irgun are a worthwhile 
ally. ‘ 

Although their fighting 
strength’ has ©} never exceeded 
¥,000 (2,000 Is probably more 
uccurate to-day) their. men are 
“full-time” soldiers, ; 

in addition, throughout. the 


nel oa scon as the weather is 
suitable. 


Duly Forwarded 

A reader of mine, Miss Ruby 
Cole, of Finchley Park. North 
Finchley, sent me a present to 
naan on to Charles Chaplin, I 
shall do it this time,-Miss Cole, 
but I do-not, want to make a 
yabit of forwarding presenta or 
ecquests to film stars. 

British films are making 
mcre money than American in 
Havana after years. of U.S. 
seeondancy. 


Hee ee ean nn en an a enamel 


BARCLAY ON BRIDGE 


By. SHEPARD BARCLAY. 


“THE AUTHORITY ON AUTHORITIES" . 


EVEN THE BEST 
GUESS 


“Well, it's your guess” is a remark 
heard occasionally in slap-dash rub- 
ber games among old friends. . It 
comes after the bidding bas ended 
and applics to the player who las 
hecome the opening leader. Logie ap- 
plies to the choice of sults selected by 
him and also to his cholce of par- 
ticular card in some cases. But there 
are lote of times when the logical 
fead fa the. worst possible and ao 
other would punlsh the declarer. 
Even the greatest have to guess on 
snany such occasions, and In plenty 
f casce they guess wrong. 


8,8 7 
HK 09 
*>DAQI752 
. + © None 
S.A 2 
H. A 10735 
D.6°4 
Cc. Q10972 


8.KQJ106 
H. None 


QA + - ae 
North. North-Solth vale 


West 
3¢€ 

- Paw 
6c, 


(Dealer: 
acrable.). | 
rth © South 


1 York. Opposing them were Waldemar 


Von Zedtwitz and Lee Hazen of New 
York at East-West of Table 1 and B. 
Jay Becker and Mrs. A, M, (Helen) 
Sobel at 
The fifth members of each tcam, not 
engaged on this hand, were Charles 
H. Goren on the Von Zedtwitz term 
ond Howard Schenken on the other. 

Ie is not our purpose to criticise 
any particular bid, but to point our 
what happened. At both tables South 
led the heart 2, which enabled East 
to discard the diamond K and thus 
take 12 tricks, Th's enabled Mr. Von 
Zedtwitz at Table } to make an “im- 
possible” small slam and catised Mr, 
Rapee to .go down only one trick 
when he could have been set two. 


Now you figure out why North's dia- | hog. 


mond bids might have. @aused both 
Souths to lead a diamond or why 
he should have Jaid down the clu! 
A, which would have shown the 
need of a diamond next. These great 
playcrs had 2 tough guess, and both 
guessed wrong, deciding the match by 
40 polats. . 


sed dead ae - 
-Somorrow’s Probicni 


North-South of Table 2.]. 


; perialists, war {fs a pro 


e 
Sayings 
Jawish community irgun = can 


: = call on = “sympathisere”—mon 


Of ite millions of words uttered in| und women who will give a 
1947, iste stood’ out for one reason| hand with illegal broadcasts 
or_ano:her. : and pamphict distribution, 

Rear Admiral William S, Parsons, ithoush pen 1” posscss 
bee wary Durceir of Homie De-| huge stocks of all types of 
ence: “It is not the atom that mo, arm 
get.out. of. control. It is the human.” amall B and automatic 

3 weapons, Irgun’s 


President Truman, announcing the . 
Truman Doctrine: “It must -be the speciality has -alwaya been ex. 
policy of the United States to sup> plosives, - 
port free peoples who are resistin; It was their experts, many 
attempted subjugation by armed bolleyed: to be graduates from 
minoritics or by outside pressure,” Wuropean univergltics, | .who 

Atlanta, Georgia, bigamist: “Judge, | evolved the electrically-doronat- 
I'm aul. summit: ie But ( can't} wd road-mine which has’ taken 
‘ace where it's wrong for a man to t 
fave Oe valves when it in all ri ferent during fhe 
‘or the Seate to have iwo Governors. . 

General George C. Marshall, on Urgun, too, produced the “male 

“iy| chur" bomb which wrecked the 


becoming U.S. Secretary of State: arterp 
ill never become involved in pol King David Hotel,: heada 
“f the Palestine 


tical matters. I cannot be drafted." 
Secretariat, - 


Sculptor Yucca Salamunich: “Pas- 
In 1946 Irgun even used theh 


slonate women always have long, 
straight noses.” ~ Pown “V-8,"—n small rocket — 


Government's 


rs | 


. offensive... 


Emperor Hirohlto, during a visit] with liqaid acid ignition. It had. 


to atom-bombed Hiroshima: “There i) 
scems (to have been considerable me 7anee of four-mileg. 
damnge here.” 


Babe Didrikeon Zaharias, fst Am Pate tear ead ore: da 
erican to win the Britith ¥ 
Golf Championship: “I just fcoaen tay aBi oe eel nave: |S 
girdle and tet the ball have it.” lack Squoe’ 0 Arnbic-apeak- 
Lor Angeles murderer: “He (the | 9S coloured Yemenite and Sep- 
victim) called).me ao dirty German hardi Jews, so much like tho 
I'm a Pole.” Arabs alongside whom they 
Chemist Harold C, Urey: “Other have lived for generations that 
animais have died out in the past. [even tho’ Araba cannot always 
I do not see why we (the human |pick them out. es 
sacs) should . be on eeate and]. Quiet killers, 
perhaps now is the time.” ~~ ‘ mmiy- 
Min ere D. scooserelts a ; ee hak aga oem Sauna : 
controlled press is Wke .an egg; } H ae 
any part of It is bad, the whole is pe ne Tang beside tonnng: 
. q 
a fivat-closg ‘intelligence branch. « 
i Arab guerillas groups, now . 
rauch........” 


rapid obiliaing  throughow 

World Heavyweight Boxing Cham-|tha Holy Land, have few. secrets : 
pion Joe Louls, explaining why he|from the “Black Squad,” but . 
wouldn't like to be 21 again: “I never | they do have.many Jews in their’ 


had acut eye, a busted car: ‘orl rg @ 
nothing......smaybe I wouldn't be as ranks “without ee 7 
lucky another time. : 

Prime Minister Stallo: "The ‘ 
agents of imperiallem are trying... ia” necep- 
to provoke another w im. |*ary_ to understand their “badge 

oc. | & rifle across the map of: Pales- 
: -1tine and Transjordan with the 
‘Halsey: legend, "Rak vkach” =("“Only. 


Soviet Deputy Forelgn © Minister 


hin omen 0 


To understand why Irgun.@ 
attacking ,the Arabs it 


+“As a general rule, I never trust al thus”), 


Looky leave me to dic in’ 
<. Secratary-‘of > Stat 
‘ancouncing “the Marshalt 


hie far pe | with ‘fae’ all, 
“Ere . sting and’ allot.” 
deen laaeniton: “ rae Kee ‘ hi 


preferring the’ i 


“tguan 


BRAATHENS 
SOUTH AMERICAN FAR EAST AIRTRANSPORT A'S. 


SAFE 


aay Atty ran "2 


laxupwous” SKYMASTER Four ExGiNgD PLANES NORWAY-EUROPB o HONG KONG. 


JONGKONG-LONDON 


‘via AMSTERDAM 


DOKINGS ACCEPTED FOR ANY EUROPEAN DESTINATION 
. NO PIIOREM YS REQUIRED i 


EXPECTED DEPARTURES FROM HONGKONG: 
18th January * 


4th February 
2ist February 
ACCEPTING PASSENGERS & FREIGHT FOR TEHERAN 
Mor Passage & Freight bookinga Apply ta;— 


WALLEM & CO. | 


Agents: 
Hongkong & Shanghat Bank Building. Tels: 34177-9 
+ Chinese Freight Agents; HIN FAT & CO, Tel. 23483 


From To 


\ 


Hong Kong Shanghai 


> 


Travel comfortably in luxurious Planes 
Piloted by Experienced B.O.A.C. Pilots. 


WINTER TIME-TARLE 


NGKONG-SHANGHAL: Tuesdays, Thursdays, & Saturdays. 


Departure Kal. Tak Airport, Kowloon, 10 a.m. 
«Arrival Lunghwa Airport, Shanghal, 3.00 p.m. 


HANGHAI-HONGRONG: Wednesdays, Fridays & Sundays. 
Departure Lunghwa Airport, Shanghal, 10 a.m. 
Arrival Kal Tak Atrport, Kowloon, 3.00. p.m. 


(LUNCH SERVED EN ROUTE). 
st Single H.K.$380.00 Return H.K.$684.00 


HongkongAtiuvays Ltd. 
For further ‘information and Boo kings:— * 


ARDINE, MATHESON & CO., LTD. 
AIRWAYS DEPT. 


Chater Road, Hongkong. Tels, 27765-6, 
sula Hotels, Kowloon. Tels. 50217 & 60237. 


‘The “Mad 


SHIP'S 


Shipm 


THE CHINA MAIL, TUESDAY, JANUARY 6, 1948. 


“SYMBOLIC VOYAGE 
First Delivery Abroad Of British Coal 
| Resumption Of 


ents | 


- London, Jan. 4. 


Some time this month, a ship will leave a port in 
Britain on a voyage which is regarded here as 


symbolic ‘of Briiain’s 
recovery. 
No well-dressed men and 


progress to industrial 


women will crowd her 


rails as she steams out, bound for Sweden. No 
‘sleck stewards will carry cocktails to luxury 
passengers. Luxury, in fact, is the last word 
one could apply to this vessel, with its sooty 


decks, its grimy clad crew, 


Her importance Hea in her 
cargo, For she will be carrying} 
the firat regular shipment of 
British coal under the new trade 
pact agreed with Sweden at the 
end of 1947. 

To the British people, made 
conselous of the fmportance of 
coal to their prosperity through 
the bitter months of the fucl 
shortage, the resumption of coal 
exporta hat come as hear- 
tenting: news. 


COLOSSAL. 
DEFICIT 


Shanghal, Jan. 5. 

The astronomical figure of 
CNS1,216,126.000.000 was cit~ 
ed by Chinese Customs 
sources today as the foreign 
trade deficit for China for 
October—the last month for 
which figures are available. 

At the same time other 
sources sald that for the 
period of 21 months prior to 
October, excess imports over 
exports amounted to US$-- 
618,351,618, October's  ex- 
ports are estimated at one- 
third of the import totals— 
United Press. 


| 


\Doetor” 


To Die 


Yokohama, Jan. 5. 

The Eighth Army, Military 
Commission today sentenced to 
death the. former Japanese 
Army Captain, Hisakichi To- 
kuda, known os the “mad doc- 
tor” at Shinagawa hospital 
prisoner of war camp, Tokyo. 


Tokuda waa found guilty on 
several counts of performing 
medical experiments on Ameri- 
can and Allied prisoners of war, 
causing the death of four and 
contributing to the death of a 
fifth prisoner, 

The four prisoners who diced 
from injections of soy bean milk 
splution which Tokuda concact- 
ed were Wiliam Holland of 
Leytonstone, London; ‘Thomas 
Thompson. iof ~ Lyson Street, 
Liverpool; Walter L. Lawaon, 
address unknown; and Ernesto 
Saxida of Trieste, a member of 
the Italian Navy, who was im- 
prisoned after Italy's surrender. 

The Britons were Hong Kong 
P.O.W'S, 

Pleas of Insanity by the de- 
fence prolonged the | trial for 
scveral weeks, Examinations re- 
vealed that Tokuda had recently 
suffered from acute confusion 
psychosis, but he recovered suf- 
ficiently to continue his defence. 
—Uhited Press. 


its black holds. 


The export of the “black 
gold" from under British soll, 
which, before the war, brought 
the nation over £34,000,000 4 
year from sales abroad, stopped 
nlmost dead at the end of last 
February, 

Production was 
to feed the home 
which Britain's recovery 
depended, 

Since then, however, produc- 
tlon records in the mines have 
sonred, and stock of coal have 
necumulated untll home In. 
dustrin) consumers — the No. 
1. priority — are now turning” 
away offern of extra coal. 

Althaugh the January ship. 
ment to Sweden is the first ex- 
port under firm contract since 
the con] crisls, Britain did ac- 
tually begin to export small 
soared, and atocks of coal havo 
amounts informally to several 
countries, including : Portugal 
and France, in the last weeks 
of 1947. 


Turned Down 


These amounts are atocks, 
turned down by already well- 
supplied factories, which cannot 
be shifted claewhere in the 
country because of transport 
dlfficulties. 

Their accumulation at the 

pitheads would seriously endan; 
ger further production. So the 
surplus stocks are sent to the 
nearest port and shipped to 
foreign customers chosen 
the Government, : 
. The conl export target for 
1948 is 16,000,000 tons of a total 
eatimnred production of 211,- 
000,000 tons, Of this, , 6,000,- 
000 tons are already committed 
to the countries whith come 
under. the Marshall Plan, and 
7,000,000 tonsa are needed for 
bunkers and depots abroad. 

Apart from Sweden and Eire, 
the only customers which at 
present have signed and sealed 
contracts, it ig still doubtful 
what countrics will share in the 
remaining 3,000,000 rons, 

Britain’as biggest annual » in- 
dividual coal exporte before the 
war, taking 1938 figures, were 
to France (6,155,460 tons), Ger- 
many (3,687,443 tons), Sweden 
(2,466,311 tons), Denmark 
(2,996,858 tona), Italy (2,266,- 
180 tons) and the Argentine 
(2,030,407 tons.) — Reuter. ~ 


ARMS FINDS IN 
CZECHOSLOVAKIA 


Prague, Jan. 5. 

The Czechoslovak Ministry of 
the Interior today atated that large 
quantities of explosives and arms 
had been found burled in several 
places close to important Czecho- 
alovak industrin) and economic 
pointe, 

Tho material was expertly pro- 
tectod against expogure to the 
weather and was packed in wator- 
proof boxes, the communique 
added.—Reuter. 


too low even 
factories on 
drive 


Called Up Four 


- Years Too Late 


London, Jan. 5. 


The War Office has issued a statement about a 36- 
ioe farmer of Olney, Buckin 


lexbert George Barrett, 


WHITBREAD’S 
PALE ALE . 

Made in England 

adsus In Quart Boitics 


in Half dozens and Dosens 
and Cases of Four Dozen. 


; report-to Bury- St. Edmunds. 


the Army four years 


He is referred to o8 “Private 
Barrett” {in the . statement, 
which says: “Call-up papers 
were issued to Barrett in: the 
autumn of 1948. On Dee, 5, 
1948, ho wrote excusing him- 
self on grounds of temporary 
(l-heatth, Alrendy, on Nov. 
28, 1948, an enlistment notice 
had been sent to Barrett at his 
then address at Buntingford, 
Hertfordshire, ordering him to 


“He did not report. apply for 


‘|a deferment or notify tho au. 


thorities of the new address to 
which he had removed. : 
“On March 14, 1944, the Ro- 
gistrar-Genoral reported that 
Barrett had been living at An- 
laby Road, Hull.. .When the 
police’ visited the house, ho had 
removed without Ieaving‘a new 
fiddreas' or ‘notifying the" 'au- 
thoritles, |: 
i “On "Doe, .5, 


ee Lard 
f ee, : 


whio was called up to 


he was ot his home farm in 
Olney. 

“A recent letter on. Barrett's! 
behalf to the Army Records, 
Edinburgh, says that he was 
engaged during the war in the 
timber trade, in o Jiconsed 
slaughter house, and as propric- 
tor of the Earl's Barton sport 
stadium in Northants.’ ° 


Barrett, who bought a farm 


-F-at-Olnoy! 10 wooks.ago for £5,- 


000, in an interview saya that 
ho did-receivy,a military notico 
in 1943 and replied that ho had 
influenza. The later not!ce he 
never received. . : 
“It must have been a alip-up,” 
he added. Sg cae 
: Yosterday, Barrott, got,a let- 
ter. from: the Adjutant at 
Talavera Camp, “Northampton, 
granting -him en nae of be 


by 


Eighty Jews and Arabs were killed and many more injured in 
violent demonstrations by Arabs in Aden against the United Na- 
tions decision to’ partition Palestine, Damage cauted by arson and 
looting is estimated at £200,000. Royal Navy and Airborne troops 
eventually restored order. Photo shows rioters engaged in looting 
stores in the Grater area. They are being heiped by Somali women, 
(APhoto,) 


Liberian Resources 
To Be Developed 


; New York, Jan. 5, 
A group of American business men, executives of 
a recently formed Liberia company, will leave 
here shortly on a fact-finding mission to dis- 
cover “the resources and economic potential” 
ie da Mr: Edward Stettinius, former 
is mexican Secretary of State, announced here 
ay. . . 


Mr. Stettinius, who is chair- self chiefly with the financial 
pdlicy matters, Incliding 
prospective 
and other 
memberrs wil) have special. in- 


man of the ‘company, will got and f 
himeelf accompany the misalon, [interviews — with 
which will study the prospecta | Liberrian —investors 
of the development of minerals, 
metals and’ agriculture in the 
» West African republic. 


terest to'look after. 


mission — will 
Liberian facilities 
welfare 
nection with 
plans .for 
Liberian Foundation. 


The first members 
miasion will leave 
Uberia on Thursday.—Reuter. 


The mission will be espccial- 
ly Intereated In cocao and coffee 
and in fishing, lumber, roads, 
railways and other public utill- 
ties as well as in banking and 
finance. 

The mission will be composed 
of five of the Liberia company’s 
principal, executives and seven 
independent business men will 
accompnny it to explore opera- 
tions in thelr own fields of In- 
terest. ; 

The formation of the 
pany by Mr. Stettinius and a 
group of assoclatea was an- 
nounced several weeks ago. Of. 
the stock, 65 percent is owned 
in America and 26 percent has 
been given to the Liberian 
Foundation ag an initial grant 
for developing health and wel- 
fare programmes. 


‘+Mr. Stettinlus and Mr. Black- 
well Smith, the company’s pre- 
sident, are planning to visie 
Liberla later. s 


Interviews 
On the present miasion, Mr. 


David H. Sulzberger, the first 
vicopresident, wifl concern him- 


the 


of 


com- 


Russia’s 
Destiny —° 
In Asia’ = 2 


BERKELEY, CALIF. 


‘ + JAN. 5. ‘. . 

RUSSIA IS DESTINED TO ks : 
BECOME “THE STRONGEST 
INDUSTRIAL | POWER IN 
ASIA IN OUR ‘TIME," DR. 
ROBERT J. KERNER, PRO- 
FESSOR OF HISTORY AT 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CALI- 
FORNIA, SAID TODAY. - 

' He sald. the Soviet economic 
eentre of gravity his been mov- 
ing steadily castward, hastened 
during the recent war by the 
romoval” of ‘war, Industries 
across the Urals to avoid dcs- 


Ag o special assignment, the 
survey present 
for health, 
and education, In cén- 
expansion 
the recently-formed 


the 
by alr for 


DIRECT 
CONNECTION 7 
for 
‘RANGOON & CALOUTTA 
Departures every MONDAY 


" HONGKONG—BANGEOR 
— SINGAPORE — 


Departures 
every’ Monday & Mriday 


HONG KONG to SYDNEY 


NEXT FLIGHT 
16th January 
Passenger & Frelght Booking Agents 


; P. J. LOBO & CO,, LTD, 
4 Chater Rd. Tela 31163 & 31100 


D 


Kila, Of. Tol. S200 


B 0 A { HONG KONG 


AIRWAYS 
Every Wednesday & Saturday 


LONDON 
for Europe and N, & 8. America 
CAIRO, BAHREIN 
for Middle East and Africa 
KARACHI, CALCUTTA 
for India and ‘Ceylon 
RANGOON 
"for Burma . 
Every Mon., Wed. & Sat. 
BANGKOK 
for Siam ; 
Every Sat., (direct) Mon, 
Paes (via Bangkok) 
SINGAPORE | 
for Australia and New Zealand 


HONGKONG AIRWAYS 


{TO SHANGHAI 
Every Tues., Thurs. &&' Sat. 
For further information and odok- 
ings apply to the General Age is: 
Tolephones: 27765 & 227766 


JAROINE MATHESON 6 COLT. 


ALEXANDRA BUILDING CHATER ROAD. 


Cut Down On Travel Time 
When you travel to the States by P.A.L. 
you go DIRECT — longer hops, shorter 


stops and the best maintenance and 


safety record of any Airline. 


For Speed, Safety and Comfort = 


Ply by” ~ 


PAL . 
"FOR INFORMATION , 
"Tel: 58330 Main Booking Office 
"58277 Freight. Office 

or Recognized Travel. Agents 


fa 


fought out With. alr power, : but 
‘also increas¢s: that’ country’ 
ef ih Agia, and on the: Paci+ 
JmAssociated’ Prods: a4 


Model 


to the world 
...and beyond ! | 


an AUTO- 


BX ,§6bX has 
Bremen t prend system of an 


entirely new design. 


Philips AO radipayes 


bring you dhese 10 great 
Radio advances: 

4. AUTOMATIC BAMDSPAEAD 
2, SILENTODE CIRCUIT 


(mere stateans, tess meined 
2, THERMO COMPENSATION 
( toning drift) 
4. PADDING CORRECTION 
(better sensituitr, 
satectiesty and fore) 


. CONDUCTOR SWITCH 


(be your own conductor) 
. CONTRAST EXPANSION 
reproduces stadia tans} 


t 
. AUTOMATIC OVERLOAD 
CONTROL 
Ceverlaading of the st imporsible} 
a. ANTL-MICHOPHONIC 
CONSTRUCTION 
Corsrephems hawt deAmiety 
. TroPic-proor “her” 
CONSTRUCTION 
|. INCLIRATOR DIALS 


DEMONSTRATIONS AT — 


[The dial on your new Philips 
Radloplayer 19 a window to 
the whole wide world. And 


beyond, too. For inside the 
new Philips receivers you will 


fInd all the latest develop- 
menty in radio—the develop- 
man has 


ments by which 


conquered space and harness- 


cd sound, even as the airplane’ 


has conquered spced. 


CENTRAL RADIO 


ELECTRIC CO, 


Kowloon, ' 


60, Nathan Road, 


and 
LTD. 
Tel. GOLA 


BRICKS— 


RED BRICKS, HOLLOW TILES 
ROOFING & FLOORING TILES 
FIREBRICKS, FIRECLAY. 


(KEEN SANG BRICKWORKS LTD. 


Hongkong Office: 
St. George's Bldg.. Tel: 


25278 


Factory: 
Sun Hul, Castle Peak. 


TAY KEE & CO. 


STEVEDORES, TRANSPORTERS, & 
GENERAL CONTRACTORS 


Suppliers of Junks, Barges, & Steam Launches. 
Speclal Work for Hcavy Cargocs, rellabie ” 
and ceasonable charges. 


Tels: 31518 & 28836. 


5th Floor, David House 


No. 67 Des Voeux Road, Central, Hongkong. 


TIME 


THE WEEKLY 


NEWSMAGAZINE 


SALARIES BODY'S PROPOSALS 
Extensive: Regrading In All De 


General 


ay 


THE CHINA MAIL, TURSDAY, JANUARY 6, 1948. 


Clerical 


Service 


The extensive re-grading 
Government departme 
Salaries Co gion, 
V of their Report. 


roposed to cover all 
nts, as envisaged by the 
is analysed jin Chapter 


Points of primary interests are contained_in the 
proposals. for establishment of a General 
Clerical Service. Below are extracts from ‘the 
Report dealing with this issue: . . 


There has, in the past, becn a 
considerable diversity in the scaler 
of pay for minor staff, artinans anid 
foremen, Some of these scales differ 
only slightly from others, Some ap- 
pear to have been created for in 
dividuat holders of poste and there 
nre wide diversities in the rates paid 
to men of presumably comparable 
degrees of skill in various * depart- 
ments, We are of the opinion, tha! 
in future, as many of the lower grade 
stall as possible. should be employ- 
ed on dally ratcs of pay with a 
Runranteed 30-day month, 


We realise, however, that it may 
nat he possible to put such a policy 
Into effect immediately and that if 
may be found preferable to retain 
certain classes of workers falling 
within these eategorfes on monthly 
rates of pay. We have therefore pul 
forward recommendations for scales 
of monthly pay for minor ataft, 
artixans and foremen, which, in our 
opinion, will renault in the climination 
of many unnecessary minor dif 
ferences in grading and will produce 
a simpler and more logical wage 
atricture for the lower geades of the 
service, We have provided scales for 
minor stall, for semi-skilled workers, 
for two grades of artisans and for 
forenten and overseers, 


Minor Staff 


The minor stall grade will in’ the 
main consist af coolies, office nessen- 
vers, sextona, notice servers, cleaners, 
seamen, carctakers, pointsmen, por 
ters, gatemen, female attendants. 
platelayers, trolleymen, rat catchers, 
rat searchers, Intrine attendants, 
female escorts,’ fernale searchers, 
park keepers, bathhouse attendants 
Dargemen, teat porters and certain 
amahs, cooks, servants, gardeners, 
forewers and stokers, 

Provision has been anade for cer: 
tain officers within this class whos 
duties are more exacting or more res: 
ponsible to enter the scale half way 
up. 
The’ semienklled grade will in 
clude office attendants, stone polishe! 
guards and watebmen, the HR. 
V.D.C. orange Warden, telephone 
boys, lift operators, tapemen, leading 
seamen, station attendants, row, 
survey coolics, addressograph opera: 
tors, sound projector operators, In 
boratory attendants, packers, store at 
tendants, keymen, — boy dressers. 
grooms, ambulance attendants div 
pensary boys, motor mower drivers 
pressmen, bathhouse engineers, steers 
men, skilled labourers, tallymen, as- 
sistant junk coxswains, and certain 
boatmen, painters, stokers, — amahy, 
ward-bays, house-bays, boys, cooks 
gardeners ani sextons, 


Artisans 


Artisans are divided into two 
grades. Grade If will consist of 
workinen not fully’ qualified for 
Grade I and those employed in trader 
where a lesser degree of skill or a 
shurter period of apprenticeship i+ 
required than for Grade I, Grade {1 
will include light attendants, head 
suards, head watchinen, signalmen 
painters, sailmakers, drain testerr 
coxswain-firemen, carriage cleaners, 
tracers, assistant headimen, mortuary 
attendants, assistant armourer atten 
dants, loading deners, and certain 
foremen in the F y and Gardens 
Departincnts, artisans and junk 
coxwwains in the Sanitary Depart. 
ment and certain boatswains, launeh 
engineers, coxswalns and house-boys. 

Among Grade I artisans we have 
grouped motor — drivers, lighthouse 
mechanice, carpenters, electricians 
riggers, ahunters, electric welders 
monlders,, headmen, fitters, dental 
mechanics, disinfecting station  en- 
sincera, the armourer attendant. 
motor mechanics and certain bont- 
swains, launch caxawains and = en- 
gincers, 


Storekeepers 
We have ‘found considerable 
variation in the pay and the titler f. 
of storekeepers, stewards and atorc- 
men. We consider that there should 
be a single cadre of storckcepers 
and stores staff under the general 


- ISSUE OF DECEMBER 15, 1947 
“NOW ON SALE. 


oon AT. ALL-BOOKSELLERS~---——-—~ 


Distributors: 


_ THE NEWSPAPER: ENTERPRISE, .LTD. ~ 


u 


‘ “WINDSOR HOUSE © 


supervision atid comrot ott! 
troller of Stores. In aur op!nion, 
thesc officers should receive thelr 
initlal eratning In the Stores Depart: 
ment and should be posied to other 
depariments as necessary. 


General Clerical. Service 


We have, received representations 
from members of the Junior Clerical 
Service in regard to the mult!plicity 
of classes and the slowness of pro- 
motion and from members of the 
Senlor Clerical Service in regard to 
the small number of higher posts to 
which . they—con—aspire, .Aftec - 
sidering these representations and ob. 
taining evidence on the: present’ .or- 
xantsation: of clerical work within 
the public service and bearing in 
mind the. policy contained in the 
Colonial Office White Paper we re- 
commend the discontinuance of the 
present system of three separate 
clerical services, onc. staffed malnty 


.,_ | by. .Chinete officers, one by focal non. 


Chinese. offcera and one..by, European 
officers and the substitution therefore 
of Gancral Clerical’ Service. open 
to candidates of jall races... : 


For thin service we recommend that 
new candidates should be selected by 
competitive examination which 
should only be open to persons in 
pomsession of the Hong Kong Schout 
Leaving Certificate or some higher 
qualificatlon, We consider that this 
competitive examination should in- 
clude an intelligence test and should 
not be exclusively in prescribed sub- 
jects. 


Four Grades 
We recommend the division: of the 
General Clerlea) Service into four 
grades—grade BIT on, a scale rising 
from $1800 per annum to $2580 grade 
{1 from $2760 to $4200, grade I from 
$4500 to $6000, and a special grade 
from $6360 to $8160, Each grade 
should be separated by a promotion 
bar, bur the ratio of posts aa grades 
Land If to those in grade IIT should 
be such as to ensure that a clerk of 
reasonable efficiency could took far- 
ward to reaching the top of grade I 
before retirement even if he did not 
receive further promotion, We re. 
commend that promotion to the 
apectal grade should be reserved for 
clerks af exceptional merit ingluding 
those with long service and excellent 
recards who may not be suitable for 
promotion to the executive grade ree 
terced to below and those who have 
specialised in interpreting, shorthand 
or accountlag, We anticipate that in 
the course of time the necessity for 
retaining this gerade except for 
specialias will tend to disappear in 
view of the opportunity for promo- 
tion from the General Clerical Ser- 
vee to the executive grade. 


Executive Grade 


It has been represented to us that 
the duties performed hy senior mem- 
bers of the Junior Clerica) Service 
and by many members of the Senior 
Merical ‘and Accounting (Local) 
ervice and the Senior Clerical and 
Accounting Service are not exclusive: 
ly concerned with clerical or account 
ing matters but are of an cxccutive 
ur administrative nature, 

We recommend therefore the ea 
tablishment of an executive grade 
similar to that in the Home’ Civil 
Service, t ‘which cotry should be 
clther by promotion from the Gener- 
al Clerical Service or by direct re- 
cruitment from outside ‘and that 
above this grade there shoul be a 
senior executive grade containing a 
number of scheduled pasts carrying 
reater responsibilittes of an admin- 
istrative nature. Appointment to this 
latter grade would normally be by 
selection fram the execuive grade 
with the reservation that appointment 
from outside might be necessary 'f 
ho olficer with suitable qualifications 

lable for promotion from the 
executive grade, 4 

Direct reeruitmnent to the executive 
grade would be by competitive ex- 
amlnation and the miniinum qualifea- 
ton should be a University degree 
or no qitalification accepted by the 
competent authorities as its 
equivalent, 


Promotion By Merit 


Tn the case of non’ Chinere entrants 
we stignest a three year period 4f 
probation ‘and recammend that | stcn 
officers should be required in add!- 
tion to obtain the first two certificates 
in’ Cantonese before confirmation. 
In the case of officers to be promot 
ed from the clerical grade, promg: 
tion should depend upon the passing 
of an examination designed not only 
to text knowledge in General Orders 
and -Colontal, Requlatinns relating to 


partments 


vwhich the’ same technical qualifica- 


POPE’S CALL 
TO YOUTH 


Vatican City, Jan. &. 

Pope Pius XII addressed 
some 3,000 Catholic: youths 
In the Hall of Benedictions 
of the Apostolic Palace to- 
night, urging them to co- 
operate in solving “the - 
burning questions of tho 
hour.” . 

Tho questions ho defined . 
as the achievement of a new 
social order of justice so 
that “overy citizen, right 
down to the last, may live in 
conditions at least tolerable, 
that all public tlfe may took 
to the promotion of the 
general good and not 
tho particular Interests of a 
party or of a class.”—. 
sociated Press. 


PELRPLLPPLLPLIEPOPPPDPIDSA 


public business, but, also to test in- 
telligence and ability to take reapon- 
sibility. 

Re recommend that promo- 
tion to this grade should be 
entirely by merit and not de- 
pendent upon length of ser- 
vice, ' 

‘We have accordingly fixed ‘the 
initial starting point: of the execu. 
tive officer grade IT at $4800 per an- 
num at a point within the scale for 
clerical officers grade I, Same officers 
in the clerical grades may show 
promise before this stage; others 
may develop Inter, We consider that 
hoth categuries should have equal 
chances of promotion. Officers draw- 
Ing so more than $4800 per annum 
should on promotion be placed on the 
next. increment in the executive 
grade acale above theie clerical grade 
anlary. , 


Social Services 


We have’ divided the executive 
grade Into two, with a promotion 
bar between $9600 per annum and 
$10080 per annum, Similarly = we 
have ‘provided for two grades cf 
senior executive officer, The nature 
antl responsibilities of these senior 
posts will naturally vary with the 
‘evelopment of social services within 
the Colony and we would not sug: 
gest that the list of scheduled posts 
we have -put forward is cxhaustive. 
We tentatively recommend that the 
holders of the posts of Chief Clerk, 
Colonial Scerctariat, General Secre 
tary of the Public Works Depart: 
ment, ‘Treasury Accountant and 
Treasury Inspector should be graded 
as senior executive officers grade J 
and the Treasury Cashier, the Ac 
countants in the Rallway, Public 
Works Department and the Water- 
works, and the Secretaries in the 
Medical Department and the Urban 
Council might be graded as senior 
executive officers, grade I. 


Women Clerks 


Women clerks have been engaged 
since the renccupation anid their 
* : * 
work has proved satisfactory, We 
have therefore provided salary scales 
for women clerical officers at 80% 


of the scales for male clerleal of - 


ficers, Grade I runs from $1440 
per annum to $2,040 per annum, 
grade II from $2160 to $3360 and 
grade I from $3600 to $4800, We 
recommend that entry should be by 
competitive examination for which 
the possession of the Hong Kong 
School Leaving Certificate should he 
the =m um qualification, 

We have made separate provision 
for stenggraphers, who shoul pow 
sess a Hong Kong School Leavin: 
Certificate or its equivalent and he 
able to pasta prescribed typing and 
shorthand test before appointment 
As stenographers grade I on th 
scale $2880 to $4800, Promosion to 
stenographer grade I should depend 
“pon vacancics in this grade and 
ability to” pass a more advanced 
shorthand and typing test. In ad: 
ditton we recommend the creation of 
a small grade of senior stenographers 
sat cceretartes for promotion to 


talep all, oellcles exterit 


tlons will be required together with. 
seeretarint ability of a high order. 

We have considered repreacntations 
from various Meads of Departments 
that the mature of the work in thelr 
parteular departments wan 40 
specialised that there was a Ines of 
efficiency In drawing thelr clerleal { 
staf’ from a general clerical service 
and through = losing men through 
transfer, to, other departments, Cond 
plaints were alo received: regarding 
the slowness of promotion for clerical 
officers and the ‘apparent unfairness 
af the aystem of making promotions. 

Certaln Heads of Departments 
have suggested that their departments 
should be made closed departments 
and that their clerks should receive 
promotion within their own, depart- 
ments. : ; 

Although we appreciate the difficul- 
ties which such Heads of Depart- 
ments may have experienced and can 
readily understand their reluctance 
to part whh officers who have, 
through experience and apectalisation, 
made thelr services particularly 
valuable in a certain direction, we 
consider that it would be neither in 
the interests of the officers themaclver 
nor of the public rervice as a whole 
to extend the system of closed de- 
partments, 


Shroffs 


Another possibility which has been 
discunsed is the creation of a separate 
Rrade oof shroffe “oc, assistant 
cashiers, We understand that in the 
past shroffs whore educational 
qualifications have been lower than 
those normally required for the 
Junior Clerical Service, have been 
engaged on the Junior Clerical Ser- 
vice scale at points varying with the 
amount of security they were re- 
quired to provide, We are not in 
favour of -the establishment of 9 
separate grade Of shroffs or ‘assistant 
cashiers, but consider that the duties 
of an assistant cashier should be per- 
formed by members of the General 
Clerical Service as part of their 
normal career. We do not favour 
any relaxation of the standard of 
entry or of the point of entry on 
the scale on the grounds that ao 
career as a shroff is a blind-allcy 
occupation, On the other hand if 
every member of the clerical grade 
is liable to be instructed to perform 
she duties of an assistant cashier, an 
immedinte difficulty will arive in 
connexion with the provision nf 
security, It may not be possible for 
the officer selected to find the ‘neces-- 
sary money or guarantees, 


: No Security 


Te has been suggested as an alter- 
native that Government might take 
up a fidelity insurance policy or that 
a Public Officers’ Guarantee Fund 
might be instituted. We understand 
that: fidelity insurance schemes do 
not operate satisfactorily and a 
Public Oflicers, Guarantee Fund 
would mean that all clerical officers 
would have to contribute regardless 
of whether or not they were actually 
handling public funds, We do nor 

er either of these schemes satis- 
nor do we consider that the 
provision of sccurity ix in itsclE e¢f- 
fective, The security system nacuro!~ 
'y Operates ta make it certain that 
any detiberate defalcations whiel 
do ogcur will be of amounts greater 
than the security, If remuneration or- 
dinarily is adequate, the greatest de~ 
errent against defalcation is the loss 
of pension right, With these con- 
siderations in view we recommend 
that except in the casc of purely tem- 
porary officers such ax the shraifs em- 
ployed for a short period each yenr 
by the District Officer, New erri- 
tories, to collect rates, the provision 
of security should be discontinued, 


' BAO DAL IN: 
SWITZERLAND 


Lond:n, Jon, 4. 
Bao Dai, cx-Premier of Indo- 
China, arrived in Basle today by 
alr from London on his way to 
Geneva, Swiss Radio reported, — 
Reuter, : 


se Serarifem, aftr tho en 
‘and. qweanding fifty Arabs. | 
n and leaving the ‘i : 


REVITALISE GLAND 
to... | 


REJUVENATE BOD! 


“? 


FOULED 


of Youth 


ENJOY LIFE TO ITS FULLEST. ' 
by taking the rejuvenating Hormone preparations of 


THE BRITISH GLANDULAR PRODUCTS LTD., LONBON 
(The original Gland firm . . established 1929) 


TABLE-OF RECOMMENDED PRODUCT 


‘ NAMES : . FOR MALE SEX. | . . 
S. ' 


TESTRONES The fnest of all rdvitalising gland tonics for the male 
$10.00 per recommended for all rundown conditions, lee af virile 
ottle. and premature ageing.  Thle preparation rejuvenates 
entire syatem and imparts new virewr and vitality, In 
able for nervous troubles, neurasthenia, depression, 1 
confidence, brain fag and everwerk, high bleed p: 
prostate dleordern ete. Kings 04 * 

An extra powerful and effective preparation fer ase In| 
Male sex, compeeed of Gland Extracts, vitamina 
vated mineral compounds, (t will restore maximam efiic! 
In 1 

eMchency, 

not a temporary etimulant bat which predaces pe 
beneficial resntte, 


VIRULES ~ 
$14.00 per 
hottte. 


SP. HP. BR. 
TABLETS “NP 
$19.00 per 
hottie, 


This compound fe made to wm new formola and recers 
where a powerfal regenerating media fs Indicated. 
tracted dosage restores normal functions and premetes 
mam eMciency throughout the entire system. Indica 
Neuroals, senescence, impotence, vitamin inefficency at| 
A wedative compound for ancontrollable overexcitabitt 
function, commen to the mate sex during middle age 
later Ife. Thie frying condition usnally responds te 
new prostalin treatment which fo weefal also (m bladder 
prostate gland disorders, insominia etc. 


FOR FEMALE SEX. 
The established remedy for functional diserders of the f 


uex. 


A powerful phratelogical 


PROSTALIN 
$6.80 per 
bottle. 


OVERONES 
$10.00 per me: 
bottle. and depen: 
and premature 
Ing, insomnia, depression, friztiity, and sterility, hot 2 
ate, Indlepensable at the climacteric period, ae 
Modern ruedical ectence’s most important contribatte 
beanty culture. A delightfal akin cream which contain 
revitalising ovarian follicoiar hermone (Ocstrin) which 
trates the aubcutanecus tleaace and brings new youth ¢ 
complexion, Its tejuvanating effects have been pre 
the yestoration ef colour to greying hair and the tran 
nef ageing akin fo that of youthful beanty and reel 
‘ wrinkles, Ines, begsiness, bed colour, difieura! 
in dleerdere ste. 
SKIN TONIC The internal equivalent of the Hermene cream. They 
TABLETS ° @ gentle tonic ation and purify the bleed and thelr 
$11.10 per venating effect ts fell (hrougheut the entire system. . 
botile. esed In conjunction with the cream resnlis are exp 
repreatnting ene wf tho most effective natural benuty tim 
qwents available today which In o@ short time will secon 
far more than lengthy and expensive courses of 
treatment. ag 


tonle 


MIRACLE 
HORMONE 
CREAM 
168.00 per 
jar 


Available at al) leading drozs Sterea 
Sole Distributors 


CHANNEL TRADING CO., LTD: 


Ada Life Didg., Hongkong. Tals 82423-32194. 


and at Macau ~ : say 


AGENCIA CONTINENTAL ~~ 


1X, Avenida Almelda Ribelro—Tel. 751: 


ese se ca 
i vi 


& 


PACIFIC ORIENT EXPRESS. LINE 


Salling from SHANGUAI, HONGKONG, MANILA’. . 


airect to SAN FRANCISCO 


MV. “VILJA" 


aeeecercdions 


M.V, “KOOKABURRA” 
MV, “VITO” .......00. ae 


weede 


Versela equipped with 


and PACIFIC COAST PORTS 


‘* Loading Hong Kong 
(If sufficient inducement) 


ee ray 


wrebin yak ceeeneeees Barly April 
ee sete dona eeecereceeees Mid April 


bulk olf storage facilities 


i Cargo and Passenger apply:— 


‘MOLLERS’ (HONGKONG) LTD, Agenth*+ 
Te], 31166 


Queen's Building 
4 


2nd_ floor 


THE DOUGLAS. STEAMSHIP €O., LTD. 


s.S. 


 HAIVANG** 


Sailing for Swatow 
1.00 P.M, 12th January 
FROM DOUGLAS WHARF 


Subject to alteration without: Notice.- 


For Particulars of Freight & Passage, Please apply to: 


DOUGLAS LAPRAIK: & CO. 


Gerteral 
P. & O. Building, 6th 


CHINESE SHIP 


20 Connaught Road, Ceatral. 


Managers, 
floor. Tel. No. 81281 


or . «, _ 
PING DEPT. 
Tel. No. 2488¢ 


t 


-ISBRANDTSEN CO., INC. 


STEAMSHIP DIVISION 


“FLYING USA. 


INDEPENDENT”’ Nth January 


Anpan 


“SIR JOHN 
FRANKLIN” 


Sth January 


FROM SAILS 


via Ports - Shanghai, Jinsen, 
Fusan. Yokohama 
Mth January 


Manila, Singapore, 
Uombay, Suez é& 
Mediterranean 
Ports to U.S. 
Atlantic Ports. 


A. P. PATTISON & -CO. 


GENERAL AGENTS, CHINA, FORMOSA & HONGKONG 


CHARTERED BANK BUILDING, 


TEL: 28116. 


CHINESE SHIPPING, OFFICE: 
20 Counaught Road, C. Tel. 24639, 


SHIP 


8.9. “BENVRACKIE” 
18.5. “BENDORAN" 
SHIP 
5.8. “BENVRACKIE” , | 


STEAMERS 


LID. 


DUE 
10th. Jan. 
tr Jan: 


READY 
12th Jan. 


TO 
London, Malta, 
Rotterdam, Antwerp 
‘and Hamburg | 


For Further, Partioulors, Apply. To— 


, W.R. LOXLEY & CO. (CHINA) LTD: 


York Bnllding 


Agents 


_Telephotie: ad 


BER WILHELMSEN LIN 


M. V. “TIGRE” 
LOADS 1th JANUARY 1948- - 


fi 


or 


, NEW YORK via PANAMA 


Yokohama, San 


: calling Bee a ae 
Francviseo,..Los- Angeles; Panatnh‘ 


rate, 


Boston, New York, Philadelphia & Baltimore 


For freight 
N, 


“SAILING DIRECT’ FOR. BANGKOK: 


4 LOADING; 10tki 
. SAILING TIth 


"For freight 


pnd further porticulara apply: tox— 
_ DODWELL &.CO., ETD., 
‘Hongkopa; &: Shanghal Bank Bldg. 


earn 


Agente: 
_. Telephope RIL, 


Ropucey | 
JANUARY,, 
“JANUARY, 


PHCilars applif ‘di 


Mid January 
MLV, “VINGNES” .... cc cereseceeeccsseceees Md February 


ES eS Se eee en A 


+ 6 ‘ i 7 x ‘ i Big i . as 
“THE CHINAIYATL, TUE'SDXY, YANVARY'S, 10g. 


‘AMER 


| General | 


alt 


oshy og 


dé! Ganilie- 


¢: 


t re 


General: 


t 
aes 


De Gaulle’s. 


n 
iy urged 


ft Vv 
Site yy 
a. 


, 


ection | 
"OF... 


Paris, Vari. 4. 
thd Holditig. of 


general - elections and!: warntd’ that’: ‘France 


must Work: harder ior 


perish, in‘ dw address ‘to « 


a great workisig: clads!-audietice in: the mining: 


‘and engineering’ textile 


in central. France;. - 
warned: that it was: 
Amnerican’ aid: 


He' declared! “Raw materiais 
and goods’ which’ we can import 
with the ald of the eventual Mar- 
shal) Plan would be precious in 
getting a start onthe road: to 
ense, But be sure that: in one 
form or another we. shall Have.to 
Pay for these products and: that 
we shall only receive them in 
propzrtion to our own efforts.” 

Describing the presqnt , French’ 
regime as “inherently incapable 
of putting through a rgal stabil: 
sotion programme,” General dd 
Gaulle urged. the organisation of 
Jabour’ cn “uh assoctative’ basis.” 
He went on by saying, “the'chjets, 
the executives and the. workers 
must work together and‘ as dquals 
and determing the conditions of 
work and thelr remuneration, 

“There raust be drgarilsed’ arbt- 
traticn. From the herd of thé 
firm to the unskilled. labourer 


He 


dach will receive payment’ ‘in |! 


accordance with thé’ prbper’ 
hietachy and {n’ proportion td the 
total’ productivity of hig fitm. 

“A'new trade unlontsm cleansed 
entirely of politics ts called upon 
to play ao magnificent role.” 


Bottom Of The Spiral . 


In his’ aptech;- General 
Gaulle sald: “Nothing is ‘lost 
but we ore'sick, we ore suffering 
from o grave’ malady which de- 
mands hard and prolonged trent- 
ment,, 

“Our present’ situation is dnly 
a stage.in a long decline. For a 
long’ time, we have been Hving’ 
beyond ‘our means. We have now | 
rauthed the bottom of: the spiral 
and are’ feeling the cold wind of 
the abyss, ; 

“For the past 23 months we 
have had six ‘governments. Each 
has led our affairs to a lower 
level than its predecessor. Every- 
body fcels that there is an irte~ 
medlable: disprcportion between 
the site of the problem we have 
to solve and ‘the nature of our’ 
regime, a ag 


Shanghai 
Campaign 


Lo ‘ Shahghas, Jan: £. 
A orackdowH" oH piibiic dance 
haan Sones anes atts 
NR —lig si .. Shortly wit 
cubarets' and: dante halls - be- 
ginhiti¢ a: graddated' close-dow 
system of drawing’ lots: . 


Wu Kai-shen, Commissioner 


.of Scciat Affaits, meeting’ with], 


cabaret owners’ and’ operators, 
sald‘ that’ the first’ drawitg’ will 
be Held’ at the end’.of. March; 
and added that “complete sup 
dression of - commercinlized, 
Gancing will be effected by the 
end‘ of September.” ; 

+ Wir told’ the owners’ that’, in 
accordance’ with: 
frorh: the central ~ authorities, 


dé} 


-town df Saint Etienne’ 
not enough to rely on 


“Stabillsntlon of the currency, 
for instance, can only be brought 
abcut by very 
which wlli be tougher the longer 
wo’ walt, 


. “We muat ut public expendi- 
ture massively, : 

Government services 
cuts in all of them,” 


Competitive Spirit! 


4 ‘ : . 
’, Declaring that order must be 
brought into the management of 
‘the nationalised Industries, Gen- 
eral de ‘Gaulle added: “We must 


MAS ag 
Be ee 


arning =. To : F rene 


TE Me OTE pe 


tT 


tough methods [, 


suppress . entire | - 
and make’ 


by |. 


control) 

t Qs except’ as records 

the’ distribution of certain basle 

commodities which are still in 
short supply. 


“We must reestablish disci. 
pline, ecsnomy and the sense af 


-| tesponsibity Jn the public ser- 


vices, ~ 
’ “AN this is necessary for 
stabiiisation, but all ¢his implies 
a’ series of mensures which in 
one way or another affect alt 
interests and offend all prejudices. 


“When it comes to deciding 
upon esq measures, and above 
‘all, applying them, the ‘regime 
based on the partics inevitably 
falls, . 

Progress Or Collapse 
: “It'{s high ttme that these 
gains and this impotence ceased. 
t is high time that'after the new 
general: elections our people can 
provide themselves with public 
authorities in line ‘with the na- 
tional wish and capable of lead- 
jng the nation towards salvation 
and renunciation,” the General 
declared.. : 

Tt js high time that those who 
want to push: Fronce into ruin 
in order to establish their dicta. 
torship on behalf of the con- 
querors' of the east saw their 
chances evaporating -— those 
chances they would find in. aur 


[bankruptcy and: poverty,. 


“It-is high: time that'the Re- 
publican -State be rebuilt from 
head to toe.” 

He. said: ‘We must progress 
or “collapse, The power of the 
nation arid the’: fate of cach 
Frenchman Aepend on. our pro- 
ductivity.” 

General de. Gaulle continued: 
“Our salvat on lies in producing 
mhore, much “better, much ‘stronger 
and much: quicker than we are 
doing. This 1s’ that: what’ the 
dictatorship party that you know 
cf (the Communist Parfy) would 
refuse to -Bive to it, in the same 
way as' the capltalism of the 
past refused io do, and ay the 
present ‘party refuses to do.” : 
The Genera} declared that the 
Meconamic renovation” of France 
and’ the improvement of the lot 
of the worket' Ile In the‘ adoption 
of the “nssociative basis.” «The 
nroment this ‘{s-renched,; He’ said, 
‘you will see another psychology 
toking the’ place’ of exploitation 
of some by. others and of class 
warfare,”—-Reuter, . 


instructions |: 


afternoon tea dancés will bée]’ 


prohibited-simultaneously with 
the first lot drawing in March. 
' The cloa{ng'of the ‘cabarets’ ia 
part of the Government's aus- 
terity’ programme. — United 
resg, 


ming, papers late 


lewsboys deallig’ in English: 
lapfags pubes bee béth aS 
sttike in ¢ Gppttal for, two -days, 
while’ negétiatlong: a x 
ing: for wi 
Yesterday, “‘pickéts”  f¢ 
with sub: ribers who pttem 
ae aah 
e/ ‘agency's ibuting. centre. 
Router pe ey” 


a a 


yesterday’ 


Pam 


af: Bares. 
Expenalve.. 
¥- Re; B 


The Royal Navy have intercep) 
Haganah ship “Unafraid" ith 


NOU@H 


ee 


kers | 


a 


—s 


ted a Jewish refugee’ ship, the © 
about 850 visaless Jews aboard, and’ 


the ship has been taken into Haifu harbour where the refugees were 
disembarked, Photo shows immigrahts ‘climbing aboard the ecaiting 


ship from rubber life rafts in which they 
harkation point on the Halian coast. 


RUSSIA S$] 
ON JAP 


Russia's view that the Council i 
of Britain, the United States, Russi 

‘should prepare the Japanese peace. 

reiterated in a note to China by 

’ the Soviet Foreign‘ Minister,: 

Moscow Radio reported todh 


‘MM. Molotov” said that this 
preparatory work could be or- 
ganised by the Council with the 
participation of the — other 
states-members of the Far 
Eastern Commission, “aimllarly 
to the .manner tn which such 
work in the preparation of the 
pence treaty with Germany will 
he organised,” ,- oe 
Copies of the -note ‘were be- 
ing sent to Britain and’ the 
United States. 
‘The note added: “It - is 
Known that the draft procedure 
for the preparation of the Ger- 
man peace treaty, on a: con- 
siderable part of which agree- 


cment bas at the -present- time 


teen reached in the Counell of 
Foreign, Ministers, envisages 
the institution of a number of 
committees and sub-committecs 
and also an information and 
consultative conference. . 
“The inclusion of the states- 
members of the Far Y 
Commission in these and’ also 


sin: the corresponding —sub-com- 


mittees and the information and 
consultative conferencé will en- 


Eastern |. 


aorre towed 


from the em- 
(4 Photo) ' 


IA STANDS FIRM 


TREATY 


London, Jan: 4, 
of Foreign’ Ministers 
and'China 
treaty -was: 
by_M. Molotov,: 
én December 30, 
| i ie 
sure the necessary attention to 
the interests of these powers in 
the period preceding the peace 
conference,” . 

M. Molotov was replying to 
a Chinese note which: expressed 
the-view that the Far Eastern 
Conimission should prepare the 
Japancse peace treaty, + : 

' The Soviet reply ‘said: the 
Chinese view Uhat “the funec- 
tions of the Far Eastern Com- 
mission ,have a direct relation 
to the peace conference for Ja- 
pan” coul# not. be  recogniged 
as well-founded, as the Com- 
mission was. excluded from 
xettling territorial . questions,- 
‘which is. obviously one -.of . the 
important component parts of 
the future peace settlement for 
Japan, ae 

Key Points: 

Tho ‘importance of' the’ latest: 
Russian note, diplomatic obser- 
vers consider, is: two-fold. : 

First, it expredses | “Russla's: 

ention 1o keep the Council of- 
Foreign Ministers in: existence 
as tho effective’ peace-makin 
‘machinery, despite- its’ failure 
to make ahy headivay in the 
German’ settlement. vO 
‘Inthe second’ place’ it: places 
China in the necessity of: deffn- 


: ‘ing- where exactly her policy- 


new stands in relation to Rus- 
sta, on one hand, and thé’ Unit- 
ed States'and' the*British’ Com- 


.{ monwealth,: onthe other, ©: 


By accepting the idea of an 
11-power' conference, China has. 
identified herself with the views 
of American; ‘Britaln;, France; 
by proposing the retention of 
tho great ‘power veto in the. vot. 
{ng procedure to be adopted; 
‘sho .hos fallen in with Soviet 


wishes, ‘. Teateets 
Step’ Further. :: 
yatta aa 
t g0 a step furt! entify. 
ing horaelf with the Soviet plan 
‘th keep thé Far Eastth' peace 


), Shy 


a me a ” 
Peninsular - 
nate aire 7 
NETS a k Sdipe x aie! ala ge pt ged tp tae 
.” STEAM NAVIGATION’ COMPAN 
: _ ARRIVALS = -- 


r:: 


“OZARDA” .... 
“LAROASHIEE? 
“ol 

vOZARDAT 


VO 


“DI 
“TREVAY. : 
“TREVAXLOR” 


SHIP 


“OZARDAY' 
“LANCASHIRE” 
“ORMARAY’ ..... 
SZREVETHOR® : 


oR 


“SANGOLA™ 


. 


Seetret 


TREV: 
“TREVA: R” 


% 


OD 
setopene Sha : 
“EMPIRE BRENT UK 
VEREVETHO! ‘ Shanghal 
Peas ut 


Z & Oriental 


Stialla 


UK; via 


Shanghal - Oth Jan. 
U.K. vin Strally 13th’ Jake 
-Amoy sroprerteensccees LICH Jah. 
Stang 9 
Bombay via Stralts 
-Shanghal , 
-ULK. via Straits 
U.K. via Btraits 
Shanghad 

U.K. vin Straits 

& Continent 


29th Jan, 
23rd Feb, 
2nd Mar. 
13th Mar, 


N..CO., LTD. 


APCAR - LINE 


ARRIVALS: 


SHIP 


seeoraeereceveeseeShonghal & Amoy 


SAILINGS 


sue 
“SANGOLA” * ; 
“BANGOLA” * 


* Has. Refrigerated Cargo 


, STEA 
SHIPS. 


~— - 


“NELLORE" 
“NANKIN” | 


Rear ror: ful 
MACKINNO 


Fe sd 


Australia 


‘particulars apply tu 
NNON, MACKENZIE & CO, 
* ‘Telephone Nos. 27721-4;- °° 


wAmoy & Shanghat 

Calcutta via Stralts 
Rangoon & Madras 
Space. 


6th Jan. 
1th Jan. 


ARRIVALS 


from 


Early March 


_ MOBILEVALA.U:S.AY | 


4.3, “EXGIA™ ossisssrssseressndeis 
_ LOADING FoR 
8.3, “KYSEA”’ Wesseasneeedrsecesenerens 
For: freight and 

- WAELEM 


Hongkong a Bank 


4 


‘| adrve of: the Council of Forcign . 


acttlemont.as the exclusive pres 


)Mintaters, 


a 


1" The" suggestion: ‘contatned’ tn: |: ° 


nota’ that’ members’ 
mreitttees ‘ahd alin: 
ald aded 
ats 


tmphae: 
taln-and- 
members : of: the: 


ritish - Commonwealthy—Rews'. 


further particulate’ apply;—<" , 
» ily ttt 4. cians 
& COMPANY’ 
Agen ys 
-* Ghirides' Pretghe’ Agehté: 
ih “ OD 
ons Molt 26858, 2eaes' a Baag 


from U.S. Aftantle Porta:—. 


thst DHS Srl Feb, 


NEW YORK via PANAMA. . 


senonee, Loading early RPebruary 
wh! 


ents, : ‘ 


Bide, Mek: MATTER: 


“HONG Si 


18th Jan. 


end Jan. . 


Page 10 7 - . . . : . . ¥ 6,108, recs: oe : ee 
“ROYAL INTEROCEAN LINES | | STOCK EXCHANGE IN: 1947 es en ere 
| erect Prices Fall ‘Narrowly On Balance. | PRESIDENT LINER 
; els. Shipping Dept. . Passage ‘Dept. 28017. ee = ay Uk ln AILIEN G's ees 
Batavia, Semarang, — Britain's ey , CARGOCATRE—SPECIE 
: London, Jan.'5. 


Chinese! Agents, Connaught Road, C. No, 82, Tel, 26188. a | 
CHINA and JAPAN LINES U. S. Clamps Bear Market » n- 6 
; fe" |Down On- Trade With 
, wide fluctuations (which ' contrasted ‘ 


TITTIALENGK. A” Due from Sailing for K ffir Or ‘nuvRIowRATION—SPECTAL CARGO OTL TANKS — 
affirs Over 
ED 
eT YIBADAK” Macassar, & Batavia, Semarang, Afte 4 A \. 2 F. 
iene Exports Of | eat ect eral sere eens Argentina 


' 


TO SAN: FRANCISCO 
88 “Marine Swallow" (via Shanzhal & Yokoh ws 
BS “President Cleveland” (via Shanghai, ad tee é ehcp 


26th Jan. Honolulu) : 
_ .__, fell by about four per cent one ba in 1947. 5. | BB “General Gordon” ¢ olla voniee TOM, 200 
“TJISADANE” 10sa ports and Batavia. Semarang, Of the major groups, for which the daily indices). Auth anes Aire et today | 88 “General Mofga” cofcit, Manila & Honotata) vw Ja, 20 
ce Macassar Macaspas 0 are calculated, affirs did the best with a.two] Argentina has given Groat Bri- Honolulu) Feb, By 
tn nor? . Bist January. ere a per gent rise, while British Government's ir-| taln the cholco of shipping, more) ‘TQ. SAN FRANCISCO AND LOS ANGELES 
Amoy & Manila a WASHIMSTON, HAS redeemable stocks did the worst with a i Per 88 “AROADIA VICTORY” (via Manila & Cebu) co 
ORIENT-JAVA-AFRICA LINE TIGHTENED ITS REGULA- cent fall as the Jong-ferm money rate altere a it rae noe bLleat Avis, Hosotata) “Jam. de". 
SOUTH-ATLANTIC LINE sree SO UGLD REFINED. IN from 2t2 to 3 perogn “ -_| purchases of Argentine food, 88 “Clovis Victory” (vin Mauituces G6 nega a 


ORT OF GOLD REFINED IN 


. uw) 19 
Due from — Loading for THE UNITED STATES FROM tish industrial shares, af. : Should’ Britain reject both} 88 “President McKinley” 
South America Manila, Singapore, IMPORTED ORE. tee vectacular lump. and ZB [gourees: Argentina would demand ey” (va Shanhal & ¥okokiaia} Ton ae 
TEGELBERG © south Africa Maaritius, | "io “Brenna holde that, wold-| 1 ouch Gnempected rally PKK. Stock — fimstisy cousen ott gee, | TO NEW YORK AND HAVANA VIA MANILA, | 
BuseeD! Papeete: di bearing. material imported | for) ‘(on reinvestment of home rall-| °°" 4° : ing meat contract which cu.| . SINGAPORE, COLOMBO, COCHIN, BOMBAY, * 
: ' Mar Bélra, cn or’ . , 
. rare rast London, aero anee United States citizens | Way money) showed A vues lone Exch ange of this country’s total exportable SUEZ AND MEDITERRANEAN PORTS i 
Port Elizabeth, or firm participate in the salo of | of only 37 and at the end of surplus at prices which National) gs «president M. ” 
Mosselbay, Capetown, gold. the year were rising towards ; Economic President Miyuvel Miran: |- 88 “Marine Fil onreé 
: Buenos Aires, Monte- | ry,’ Trensury's action ‘petated- Inst January's all-time peak. - An active market with prices welll in called niggardly. o Filer” 
video, Santos, Blo ly confirms Reuter’, roport that} Home raila were virtually | muintalned. a saat ania ‘Argontine . trade and financial| 88 “President Polk’ 
de Janeiro. a bullion broker who sought tol unchanged on the year. For- tiie ‘| negotiations with Clive Bailjou's| 88 “Mount Davis” ........ 
Mth Fe sell foreign gold as a United efgn rails may have been the | Banka: IK, & 8, Dank 2010b, 2000/20 mission have been suenended anil AMERICAN PRESIDENT LINES, LTD. 
le 


t cargo on through bill of lading accepted for H Len. Reg.) £120%n; Chartered | Jan, 7 ponding arrival 
Transhipmen fs States subsidiary of a foreign gold beat performers of all (one mart tani Rea) | eva mi ars peek per da che intel Arcoatins 


= Zanzibar. 
Dar-Fe-Salaam. Mombasa & Zansiba producor falled. to obtain the monthly index ahows them up| Sis. "nie ot Hast Asie 1220. Hah well p, tho tatens Argontine), at. Georgd's Bids. mele iNos sialyl 


ecessary approval of the Trea- . 
UgTRAAT — —_gouth Ameries, Shanghal, Yokohama |" Dopariment, BB per cent on the yeas). | Timi Geni ie tthe appeared uniopreyaed by, tho, re 7 
SOENDA” ath Jan Pho. Tressury’a Jatext ruling} In an inflationary year, com-| Union fom Tb: Coot siee poont semi-official “throat” to halt 
te : prohibits all United States na-| modity shares should have done] °"Ayi tea, Douglass 260n; ILK. & 2M. moat shipments entircly, which! @ 
RUYS South America South Africa tionals, not only importers and! well; One index showed them | steamboats 164%4n; Indo Chinas. (Pref.) | would doprive Britain of approv 
South Africa South America refiners, from .participating inyup 16% but other indices show] 100n: (Def.) 300n; Shella (Bearer) 77/6 imately 450,000 tons . annually 
| zh Yan. form March" | selon of foreland OD Or pu ote ot down 10, |no® treet, co) a7: They polnted out that Anti 
HINA LINE Fi i ae Tete nay | ean Cenk ONE aL TUDUAT NP]. peas, Waetree rier HK. [Oouid hardly bo absorbed in nar. D' 
» unlaiaes ee or Sailing for may continue” {0 refine foreign | three per cent. a anenae Wes (New) [ets othor chan British —United TRANS PACIFIC SAILINGS 
ue H : Pross, ~ 
ld bearing material on a strict Docks 85%b, 37a, 85/8¢sa; China Provi- 
“HEINRICH peat Aaney Singapore, Femns A eviee charre Dasis and then re- Bear Market Ended dents 23%b; BThal Dockyards = 17% b, TO BSPECIAL CARGO. Los Angeles — 
{tg foreign owner. 17 shae : : CIAL CARGO OIL TANES—- - 
JESSEN” oth Jan, export 1b The two per cent advance in Mining: Raub Mines’ . 
re If any United States national : Due Saite 
Sing: ‘ or company profits from or par-| Kaffirs resulted from the de es r 4 an 
“VAN HEUTSZ” Belawan Delle. is Bosabure Tere ticipates’ in the resale, then the| cline during the first half years| oui. "ose. betel. m t os SURPRISE” an carta. cs 
pares 1 mee arth Jan gold cannot be legally exported] followed by a sharp advance in} yande (Old) Bab, Sé%e, daai F Chi a . “PACIFIC BEAR” Zan, 18 Jan. 14 Direct 
; ea an : from the Unitod Staies—Reuter.| the July and August converti-| ote: @'hel Tanda 4Xbs | Hanokres or in ae UBLYING DRAGON” ° Ton 23 Jan. 24 
Amo: = aes bility crisia and most of thig] states 2001 ILK. Realtles 180; Chinese ' | as. “PHILIPPINE BEAR” a 
Swatow, £ Z yc till held at the) Eette Men. Ottawa, Jan. 5. fae oni bead ep 29 Jan. 39 Vin Kobe 
. ; advance Was 8 held a Public ‘Utiites: HK, Tramways 260; . ve 5.8. ‘Reb, 6 Feb. G6 
Agents HOLLAND-EAST ASIA LINE | Money Market end of the year. 4 Peak Trane 4018) ‘1B New) ant Ser The Pia lire gk of 8 se See a 
, ” Hoading for ; Mid-year lows were regnrd-|Ferrice 126; Yaumatt Ferries o007 shipped from Canada to China 
*“LEOPOLDSKERK In port Manila /Singapore / Gold again took the spotlight| ed ns the end of the long bear [Tim (Od) 20D. Ft foKse: (New) as part of & $10,000,000 deal be- 
Salling FOr. Cotombo (Port sald’ / yexterday as it followed up| market in Kafffrs, which had f Pi bib, | tween the two conn for, 
onane nal Aiea eitten/ Saturday's 10-point apurt with | lasted several years and so far . ‘ Cannes salttary equ pment, f 
8th Jan. Antwerp /Kotterdam/ — | five-point sprint to bring the) this has been "verified, in spite Telephones’ (O}d) 39% b; es Pience, aia lending yy Arsivals from New ‘York, Boston,, °° * 
Ansterdam /flamburs/ | closing quotation “up t0 $319 a) of continued world inflation, |” jpaustiater Call, Mees, (Ort) 2001] ground equipment are also in- Other Atlantic Ports via Panama ‘ 
Copenhagen / tal, which handicaps mining. (refi) 695 Canton’ Teen In; Cementa] Oe te deal, which as, “SPIT Duc’ dan. 18 
Gothenburg / Opering at $210 the markef] ‘The slump in British Govern-| (ota) 34s; (New) 82%, B2%ner JLIC cluded in the deal, which de- ag: “GOLDEN a ge aac iergernir anes Tike 
(sto, early started on a non-stop climb to t sdeemable stocks wags |Reree2ithe. veloped from the. 1945 mutual] "4 8 eerie et tt wd 28 
Pebeunry } } ment irredeemab fitores &e.2 Dalry Farms (X. Rta) | nid agreement, . Sallings to Manila : ; 
8.8. “GOLDEN WEST” cccceceeseeeesceetes. Sails Jan, 24 


$318. From then on it fluctuated | significant. Transport nation-| go; Rights 40n; Watecns 60b, Tx, 70 


The small arms ammunitton- 


sn; Lane, Crawfords 52b; Sinceres ‘8b; 


between this fixie and $314.) alisation at the end of 1947 ex- 


oo , a ¥ . Ltd. king equipment included ma-| 4.5, “STAGHOUND” eRE SEES ee Vea eee Sails Feb. 8 
re cri st 3 kK Hue from Loading for In the afternoon St took one bisr} tinguished £1,000,000,000 of | Chinn Erdporium 12,80a8; Sun Co, Ltd. | ma , oe i eb. 
MOLE OLENIER turupe Manita /Singspore jump fe a0 receding, one} equities und crented Oe same |"! "GE, stor Wim, Powel Mir orci tools, power tools and Sailings to New, York, Boston, ; ; 
th Jan. Colombo /Port Sa. roint at ¢t se, t oof dditiona overn- te ‘ ; * . Oth via ma anal - 
Sattiing for Alecandela (Haifa / : Plantes “Murs firmer. and hank ascuritien and the Nation. A ecilaiovest China” Entertainmenu] . When’ assembled, ‘it will be er. <Atlantle Ports Pana Cc 
sbanghat Genoa /Marsellles / cloned at $11.75 a 100 after| nlisation Act docs not repeal] S47 JLK. Copitructions (Old) 6%b:] Able to" bredee 808 bullets, “OSPYTFIRE? C CARGO OIL TANKS — 
& Japan Autwerp /Rotterdam / : oligation Hj] New) a3, Vibro’ Piling S¥ins Mareman! yped chidfly in the Lee Enfleld| 9-5 ITFIRE os .cccccenesctevececrseeace Sails Jao. 13 . 
‘ amsterdani Hamburg / opening at $11.60. the law of supply and demand | tyycstments 18/807 (LK). 1/60, , rifle, aff certain modium ma-| 54 “PIONEER SEA ios seven sien esnwede bh uea's 1b. 
: Copenhagen { : Chinese National aaa either way. - Cattenst Ewos, 1s. chine guna i : 
: Gothenburg utures opencg at 31 cents an ets a : } 
Nie of Feo,__ | clad” at "ab-i/e ants Yor[ Great Question — yee eae Bee peo Ga 
Loading (or CN$10,000. Spot was stationary | Less monoy in chasing more NOTICE. :TO “| guns and in the new Canadian _ UNITED STATES LINES C0. 
“ALPHERAT” In Port Mar In /Singapore a ete cents, h dat Government securities, and CONSIGNEES automatic pistol.—Reuter, 
- Colontbe /Port Sald/ . Ticala "wore unchanged Ol | more money is chasing fewer , General Agents 
Alexandria /Halfa / - $27.20 a 100, NEI Guilders ap- | equities. ‘CONSIGNEES, PER CANADA | | ai Gacnate Bullding Tel. 81261 (8 Un 
Genoa /Marseilles / preciated to $27.40 a 100. The New Year promises to be (C LINES LTD, TNT WAREHOUSE a f a (8 es) 
Antwerp /Rotterdam / U.S. dollara relapsed aftet | ively. Massive switching from 7 ; , 
Copeshagen, Gothen bare, a temporary firming up in the | defunct home rails into indua- SS. “CLIFFSIDE a SEARCH | 
early March, morning and closeq at $4.90. trials and other sections may} hereb: otified’ that heir. : 
: TD Sindh as. were Auneaitan |e tee ey ie ducheeged toss | Sila Win teel coir tale tae 
= 5 ‘ 0 i} Bt n je New York. police aa ong! 
Agents : SILVER LINE L pounds at $12.51. aan ee ue. the Hosgkong & Kowloon Wharf |that they had been unable to ‘trace 
“HENDONHALT,” Due froma Salling for In Shanghat, yesterday (says | tion and Argentine rails pay-off. & Gotlown Co's ‘godown where THs Jy Chender,’ Gell toa be 
U.S. Atlantic ports, U0,S, Atlantic Coast Reuter) open market rates were] Transcending these great fin- it mee eg ae lek es a. aie one yore ie ne . 
lite February Ports via quoted - at CN$88,000 (buyers) | ancial shifts will be, on one] are tee and [plosive had been, found in | New 


Singapore and Suez, | and CN$90,000 (scllers) for| hand, British industrial uncer- 
the U.S. dolJar, and CN$287,- tainties and on the other hand 
000 (buyors) and ..CN$293,000 varying prospectn of United 


(sellers) for Sterling,  . States aid, and -over all will 


———— stand tho great question of 
BOMB KILLS « [world inflation or deflation — 
CHILDREN 


Reuter. - a 

London, Jan. 4. 
Three children were killed and 
seven were seriously injured ot 
a town in Palermo Province wher 


Jersey consigned to firms in Halfe 
and Tel Aviv. Military 
was also found. 
The police ttated that . Chender's 
phrents had told them he was in 


M. V. “BENGAL” 


"Leading Hong Kong. 10th January vias 
" ; for. 


ADEN, PORT SAID, GENOA. MARSEILLES, ANTWERP, . 
, ROTTERDAM (AMSTERDAM), COPENHAGEN, OSLO |, wd 
2 ‘and GOTHENBURG : 


Tanks - avallablo suitable for the carriage of oll ln Bulk, a sl 


where delivery may be obtained, 


material |. 


Daniaged: packages are to be 
left in the Godowns for 
examination by Gonsignees and Paris. 
the Company's Surveyors,;| 'when the police raided the New 
J Messrs, Goddard & Douglas Qt] York warchouse they said they found 
10 a.m. on 12th January. : stenellling in pene on si similar 
a bomb, which they" had found, cases scovere at Jersey ity yes~ 
exploded, Rome Radio sald to: Bact ak a: eaten terdays—-Reuter, 
night--Reuter jon ‘arehouse, Regulations| | 

Gonsignees must have a Revenue | ~ 


7 ‘DE LA RAMA LINES: 


‘WXPRESS CARGO LINER SERVICES 
Tv AND FROM PACIFIC & ATLANTIC COASTS 
U.8.A, LOADING DATES 


Loads ; Date Veasel Officer in attendance when! . nsienees’ ‘For further particulars apply to:—~ ass 
Atiantle Cosst ) tate gan NA ANICE T ( call F a rg) Se GILMAN & CO "ITD. i 

Late Jan. “mv. “DONA ANICRTA” ned. ao . e oe, 

} Early Feb. my, “MINDORO” ruman a or : Waterman Steamship . : ee 


No claims willbe admitted Agents, “Telephone $1146, 


after. the goods have? lefe the - Corp ration . 
steamer’s godowns, and ail SS. “FAIRPORT” 
goods - remaining undelivered 

after the 18th January, * 
will be, subject to rent, 


aa Quick Action 


.v. “MANGALOBE” 
Atlant Coast } 18th Jan. ' mv. “ANDAMAN! President Truman, dlatmead baie pen a 
54. “DONA AURORA” serious Con fonal delay to the rshall| ; : 
Plan, will : all possible emphasis on the into 
_ crucial n ‘or speed rations Wharf wed God ; i : ATLIN ; 
Yess! when. he presents. the House of Representa- ised. . [where: ae may be objatned | : Direct. to LOS eager FRANCISCO 


“ mo tives and Senate with his “State of the eee poon ay, the goods are landed 
ve “ANDAMAN' Ris a a; 4! |. 
nas message on Wednesday, ie Inouranct wt xe cima il be Licha PORTLAND, ‘VANCOUVER & SEATTLE. © 


ing arrived * Hongkong 
ignees of cargo are hereby 


Fs Tos hiteaie - | 10th Jan. . 
v 


‘Atlantlo Coast : © 2 oe 
Tow Bsn 20h Sun, ¥3-“DONA-AURORA cas —_ ie a0de-have-Iaft—the m8. ROSEVILLE veaeee woe ce ee JAN. 
saga selon . Feb. mv. FBO. cae April 1 "os ihe last any for thofof Mr. Charles Eaton, Chairman] ee antowan, sh Te. GING Gth-FED 
. 1 ea 5 ratification of the European re-jof tho House of Roprosontatives Tage NN iS, : ‘ARRIVALS FROM. PACIFIC COAST 
BOOKING AGENTS for P.A.L, | covery’ programme, but Whita|Forelgn Affairs .Committes—him-¥ trongkong, 6th January, 1948 All = broken}. chifed ms. STIRLINGVILLE" -....2 
House sources now declaro that |aolf an active supporter of the viata cnt Rohit jdqmage ged goods are to be left in| ms. “BOUGAINVILLE . 


_PASSENGER ACCOMMODATION. “BU 


ho wants even quicker action since }plan~whon ho ‘gavd” tho warning - - the: godown ‘where they will:be} | 
ee ened Douael. eos Freight Agents, 


Britain, Franco’ and Italy, among |that “if. wo got it through Be 


.THE DE LA RAMA STEAMSHIP CO., INC. 


-: MARINA’ HOUSE CHINESE SHIPPING OFFICE |‘tvore’ sconomis “hazards befere| Price ner NOTIGE ‘70 CONSIGNEES | Mest: Goddard. and ‘Douglas : 
Ht ene = SANE ik LINE 
Tels, 28676-—22675 Tels. 2378820158 | that date. iio saeraipnes Anta lesegtloa 4a HOLDING | z) Om. Me. SL ane Aes Cee (CHINA) LTD.: 


' J 
In‘ any:' ease, . Congressional underetood to ba counting oh the} Pa Wes oe I. “aE 7a BANC LINE. (hina) ha kings Bulging: Tel, irre 


warnings that Gnol-eaction:on tho aa ¢ tho. testiniont Ges 
prezramhs may not be oxpectod veneas of the ents "Messrs, Goddard : &.: : with ‘the, General 
Botore. Juno“i are considered tq ofr, Marshal, i Mr. Lew “aatain ead will ‘tend ‘at 10 am, on - saat ee a 


tar By dee oot [ae goverment “wate i five storage erik te aarieg [vate -Qiflear in. ‘attnaica 
a ey | 9 a kd 


Chene * aati of tho whole] into Congrossmon © new, sense’ af 


: geTo 1D iitleteathag the effect of delay ; : , t 
‘Connauin toad West. : “melephivie 1033. : a Sresult™ on'tho programme's achodul At) }-yptuist 
' ir In atarting the on the programt iabome siatitie " Jndorplgned Saithto / fours 


ey Pe SAILINGS im a > .[ plan, thes makfa probable that and catienaten. showing an sverags pecnt-at ¢ i pis fr iat be ship's: aitival;|.”. 
4 Le he ! “ anothdr “a! schom price rise o: or in (90 thereafter | tted. Lino he recognised: =| io 
$ | Rayo. “tr inated if wh ‘win. | commoditios eae cane fu a ae ee iN : Ack 

Yi wer for tho: frat oS onthe 


900,000—were: 
“This nies 


ony 


MESSAGERIES 


Oi me ae 
y MoS Gee w 


Arriving from'EUROPE via, Ports 
“CHRISTIAN SASS" ......00 + Middle January 
Ne “ANDRE LEBON" ......csc0 ++ Middle February 


: Fog 


Sailing to EUROPE via Ports 


> 
as, “ANDRE LEBON" End Febeiaey 


For ‘Passage ard Frelght apply to 


CIE DES MESSAGERIES MARITIMES 


Tol. 20051 (three Lines), 


] 


Queen's Building. 


1, CONNAUGHT ROAD CENTRAL 
_ Telephones: 30331-8 Private Exchange. 


atone CHINA ‘NAVIGATION co., LTD. 
SAILINGS TO 


sO invanone "& 
‘ Penang .. 


SINAN” . 2pm, Th Jan. 
FOCHOW 
. 4 pam, 0th Jan, 


“POVANG: af 

: Mucassar, 
5. Sourabaya & 

eg Hatavia wo, 

“HANYANG” Joe Sanghat oo... 
“UTUNAN' . Foochow, 
Shanghal & 
Tilentsin 


. 4 pm, 12th'Jan, 
4 p.m, 13th Jan.* 


, 5 pm, W%th Jan. 
* 3nils from Custodian. Wharf 


ARRIVALS FROM 


A SWALOW oe ceeeeees 
"Java, Singapore 


“PSINAN" athe 
“FENGTIEN” 
“SINKIANG" 
“POYANG” 
“HUNAN” 


“NEWCIIWANG" 
"HANYANG" |... 


CANTON 


. Cth din. 
. Ith Jan. 
8th Jan, 
Mh Jan. 


. 10th Jan. 
nts eee . 10th Jan. 
« Shanghak . 


RIVER LINE 


Arrives .. 
Sally... 
Arrives 

Salls vce 


“FATSHAN" 


. 6am, Ith Jan, 
6pm. 8th Jan. 
8 a.m. Ith Jan. 

9.30 p.m, 12th Jan. 


Agents: BLUE FUNNEL LINE 
U.K. SERVICE 
ad =. Arrivals from 
“MENELAUS” U.K. viaStralts 


“PANTALUS” cet oN ames 
‘AG APENOR” 


Mid, Jan. 
22nd Jan. 
27th Jan. 


(cee) 


Saflings te to 


Genoa, Marseliles, Havre. 

Liverpool & Glasgow 

vine Straits & Port Said. 
Liverpool vin Port Said . 
Marseilles, Havre,, Liverpool 
and Glasgow: vin Port Bald 


“MYRMIDON” 


9th Jan. 


“ADRASTUS" 2ist Jan. 


“PRIAM" 
Early Feh, 
“MEN 


AUS" Genoa and Liverpool 


via Port Said . 
Early Feb. 


NEW YORK SERVICE 
Arrivals from 


U.S.A. via Manila 
and Shanghai’ 


Agents: Australian-Griental Lire, Ltd. 


Arrivals from 
Australia via. Maniia 
Sailings To 


“YUNNAN Sydney & Melbourne via Manila - , Bist Jan. 
% Accepts cargo to N, Z. and Flji Islands ports on through B/L 


*PRIAM” End Jan. 


UNNAN” 28rd Jan, 


All Tha Above Subject To Alleration Without Notice. 


General Agents for SKYWAYS (FAR EAST) Ltd. 


_. (See Separate Advertisoment) @ ; 
GENERAL Agents for AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL AIRWAYS . 


BOOKING Agents for; B.O.AC, CN.AC, PAA. &. PAL. 


- Wor, Passage and Freight Particulars Apply To The Above. 


. MAERSK LINE 


\A. P. MOLLER, COPENHAGEN: 


Moller Steatiship. ‘Company Inc. New York 
General Acents. 


MONTHLY SAILING.” TO NEW. XORK, 


‘LOS ANGELES ahd PANAMA. 
“JOHANNES MAERSK” ......... 


Jan. 
iG TRUDE MARRS 000001, Bb of 


Bpeciad Tanks available tor the carriage of ‘all ta Wolk 


Rane oy RT 


2g 


MARITINES MOVE 


"4pm. 10th Jon. , 


“" > THE: CHINA’ MATL TUESDAY, “JANUARY | 6, 1048, 


| POST. OFFICE 


‘AIRC RAFT. 
NTS. 


‘ARRIVALS FROM 
Poole yin Bangkok: . 
Jan. 8, BOAC (Capt. Town- 
send). aio pm. 
Manila: 
Jan. 8, Cathay Pacific, 


Binkepors vik DankKok: | ..... 
FEO ee tia, 2 Dat. 
an. aS BOAC (Capt. Rudd), 


eas onl te 


Raebuirm, 330 pml.. - 
Jan. 9, he Altways (Capt. 


_| Varjey)s 3.3 Poeieyie 
Ban’ “Wrauic 2 twin Hondtutes 
kinawn, 


Guam, 0 
445 


ake," 
Shanghal) :: 
pm. ny 
an >Wrantisco iva i Rloniolaia, 
anita); 


"1230 


iJon. 8 Pan- Amertean, 
Wako, ‘Guam ; 
¥ 12.48 


;Jan, 7, Pan-American, 
77, 


Batre ht ight oe 
Jan, 6, Air France, 2 p.m. 
. 2 Ale. France, 2.p.m, 

i DEFARTORES TO 


ia Bangkok: 
ue BOAC (Capt, Bimeo), 


Paciti, i sum 


9, Cathay Pacitle, 230 
ue Philippine Airline. 


Sha : 
Dal. A ENAC.. (Den) 1245 am. 
bet ‘6, Philippine Airlines, 

Jon.0, HK Airways - (Capt, 

Raeburn), 10 a.m,: 

‘Jan. ALK. Atrways Capt. 
vane. 10 am, 

San. Franolsco’ (via, .Manila, 
Guam, Wake, Honotata 
Jan. 8,.. Pan-American, ‘8 

Sani Francisco (via- Shang! 
ORINAAA, Guam, Wake, Hono- 
ula): + 
Jon. 9, Pan-American, 10 am, 


ta 1, Alr France. 7.30 a.m. 
ulids Krug 
umours 


_ Washington, Jan. 5. 
_ Rumours that r. Julius 


Krug, Secretary of the Interlor, am 


was about to, leave President 
Truman’s officlal family per- 
sisted today despite denials by 
both men, 

Reports have been. flying. in 
recent months and. they. got a 
new spurt on ‘Friday following 
a secret White House conference 
between the President, and the 
youngest Cabinet officer. 

After the’ parley, Mr, Krug 
‘evaded reporters by  alipping 
outaide, and has not been avail 
able since. 

Mr. Krug said several. weeks 
ago, that he would remain in 
the Cabinct “as long as My. 
Truman wants, me’ and” that 
there had been no, suggestion 
that Re resign, 

Ward from top White House 
levels {s. that Mr. Truman. has 
the highest regard for Mr. Krug 
and fs well satisfied with his 
work.—United Press, 

GERMAN POLITICS: 

>, Frankfurt, Jan, 4, 

The “Provisional Committee 
of the, German, Peoples Congrens 
for Munich and Upper Bavaria,” 
formed at,a.mecting {n Munich 
this nfternoon, unanimously de- 
clared | te golldarity with . the 
“Gern Peoples , Congress,” 
whic wet in, Berlin, Jase month, 

the, German news agency in 
American..Zone .xeportmd. 

, The, committee ,called on. the 
people of Bavaria to join the 
“peaples’ , movement”. for thé 
weer and peace of Germany.— 

u 


THE | EAST ASAI C cor 


MS. 


tig ans it Januitty 


p SAID vate 


ORT 
| ott 
taste avaiiaehs ry 


. THE EAST “ssiatle co., 


_ Que Bldg tad 18, oe 


UMAEAYA” 


MAIL Ni ICE. 
Rey 


otherwise alated, 


Anilele and Parcel Posts close 10 minutes J. 


cariler than the Ordinaty Mail. 3f Mall 
close befpre 10.90 w.m... . Rewlatered- and 
Parcels wail cloea at 8.00 on previope 


day, 
‘TURADAY, JAN, 6 
Cleeing Times Dy Air’. 
* Airpiall, far, Bwatow wand Amor, (tee) bes, 
vo am, (Ord) 9.30 a.m, 
Alrmall for Shanghel: (Reg.) 9 m 
(Ord,) 9.80 ams, . 
Alrmall for Danakok, Rangoon, 0: 
gutta, Karagh!, Dahreim, Oniro: (Nalrobi, 
o! 


y] Wah - iehay. 


ae 
tee! 


RD, 
(Bou! oa 
phons, Capt, 


Pian 


unt. 
Penation (he @ 8) oo Dd Duoy 
‘ , DEPARTURES YESTERDAY | 
Calta Dalren 


Dun Yu , 
cht Chana 


hannealura, and, Marseiiies vie Gainey, Cacia 


Augusta and London, Kowloon C.P.0. 
(Rex.) 290 p.m. (Ord) 3 p.m. G.P.0. 
(Rer.) 8 p.m., (Ord.) 93.80 p.m. - 

* Aipmatiidor Saigon avd Parts, (Rem) 
& pra, (Ord.) 2.20 p.m. Rent 
Alrmall: for Amoy and Foochow, (Teg 

a pm, (Ord) 230 p. 

Airm: for Shangh Nanking, Stan. 
kow, Tulngtao and Pelping, (Rem.) § p.ra., 
{Ord.) 3.30 p.m... 
yAlrmall: for. ‘Bwatow, (ites, a pm. 
(Ord), 84) pon. 

, ,Chealax Times Dy feo and ‘Train 


and Bat 8. on 

Bangkok, 10 a.m, 

Macao Tilnehan and Bhatt Y pam. 

Canton, 2,.p.m. ‘ 

Manila, Colombo, E, and Bouth Africa 
apd: Bombay, &- p.m, 

Natayla, Macasser and Bourabeya, ipm. 
Macao, Teinthan and Shekki, 4 p.m. 
Kongmoon, 4: pan. 

Canton, “8 p.m 

WEDNESDAY, JAN... 1 
+. Cleolng + Times By. Ale 

Alrmall for Bwatow, Tainan and Amoy, 
(Rem) 9. 0. (Ord.) 0.30 =m, 

Alrrail Manila P. Honolulu, 
UBA, and Canada, (Iteg.) 9.30 am. 
(Ord) 10 a.m. 

Alrmail for Manila PLL, (Rex.) 3 p.m, 
{Ord.) 230 p.m. 

Alrmall for Canton, Liuchow and Kun- 
mings Alrmall. for Tainan; Airmail . Cor 
Amoy, Shanghai, Nanking,  Hankow, 
Telnetao and Poiping, (Ree) 3 p.m., 
(Ord.) 9.80 p.m. 

Closing Times Dy Bea and Train 

Canton, 7 a.m. 

Macan, Talnahan and Shekki, 

Bwatow, Noon, 

Macao, Tainahan and Bhekki, 7) p.m 

Canjon, 2 p. 

Btralte, Aden and Egypt, 2 p.m. 

Hothow, 8. p.m. 

Shanghal, 8 p.m. 

Macao, Tsinshan and Shekkt, 4. p.m. 

Kongmoon, 4 p.m. 

Canton, 5 p.m. + 


Britain’s | 
—|Geld Sales 


hington, Jan. 

ow Britala Waghin sei42.920,- 
orth of gold to, the Unit- 
fes in November. 

This was more than half of 
the .U3$267,300,832 worth re- 
ceived from all countries that 
month, the Commerce Depart- 
ment said. Canada was accond 
with US$68,697,483. and: Argen-| ¢ 
tina third, with, US$66,848,981, 
all in foreign coins. 

The . British and Canadian 
shipments were in bullion. 

Russia sent. no gold in 
November but did ship US$705,- 
606 worth of silver, ranking 
next to Mexico and ahead of 
Hong Kong among:top ailver 

Hong | Kong --sent 
3,125. —Asscclated Press. 


éd 


8 am. 


Stream! 
Abacus — 


' | Demonstrating his new inven-, 


es 36-year-old Hat Pl-poo, 4 
ohammedan Chinese, -raced. an 
inary Chinese abacus and., a 
onroe calculator and. his im- 
proved abacus fps faster even 
than the., calculator ex. 
; caviuplicalon 


improved, abacus the 


denise Piha a raieatot: a move 
a position in 

apee _ malts Tieation aalit 
eqiculitor and |p compound. {n. 
peeett calctilator. — Associated 


IT 


eb ditt 


Krolune 
[Fo Yang (B. @ 


YESS! 
Alipar - CWRilanssom) eseoeee, Kin, 
Alderonda (0. & 5.) .. - Tal 
Alsharat: (J.C.P.L.):.3.. 
Atyaranthus (Wheelock) 


Gqgnon Bar (Caroll 6.8.) 
Oanandoa, (China BB, Co) . 
Oathering -(8.K. Aala) >. +. 
Oharles Macdonnell (Rverett’ 
Clovarlock (Wheelock) .. 


Eastern City, (Dodwell’s) . 

empire: Wilde (M.0.T.) 

Emp, Farrar (Wing Yous Cheong) ,,,,06 
Rmplge Magpie (Jardine’s) .... Ts 45 


‘Empire Tern {Willlamson) 


Emp: Wye. (ard: 

K. Sang (Jardine’ 

Feng Tien (DB, & 5. 

Fu Kwang (A.P.C.) .... 
Haldia (Wo Fat Shing) 
Hin Sang (Jardine’a) . 
Hal Tan, (Dovglaa Co.) 
Larksloek (Wallem) 

Lee Chun (Tal Chong) 
Mactan (R. Hass) ... 
Marylock | (Wallem) .. 
Myrmidon (B, & 8.) 
Mav Bane (Jardl: 

Nan Chang (DU. & 8.) 
New Combla (B. @ 8.) 
Perllock (Wallem). . 
Panamanian (Wallem) - 
San Jeronimo (J. Manners) 
Bhantuns. (2. & 8.) 
Shengking (B, & 8.) 
Awartenhondt (J.C.P.L.) .. 
Ban Fduardo (J. Manners) 
Tatshen Peak (P. & 0.) . 
TiltJalenake (J.C.P.L.) 
Tatune (B., & 8.) .. 
Wah Ohung (& Shiney 
Whangpu.(B.:& 8)... 
Wu Chang (0. & 8.) . 

Yo Chow (B. & 8.) 


AMERICA: 8 
(Pacific & Atlantic Coast) . 
Sea Berpeant (U.8.L.) from Ban Franclaoe, 
! Dee. 20. 
Pree, Monrow (A. Pia) from N.Y, Jan. e 
Boltfire (A.P.L.) from NY, .... Jan. & 
Trein Macrsk (Jebsen) from LDS Feb. & 
Kk Pi Co.) 


Marine Filer 
Fly Independent 
. UBA. 
Gertrude Maersk 


York ... Jan. mh 


eee e cedar enene 


Surpriee (A.P.L.) from Ban Frencieces y, 


coeveee Jeu, 12 
Ban Francisco 


i and Loa Angeles . 
Pacific Bear (A.P.L.) from 
} and Loa.Angelea s... 
Marcher Musrak deter 


fork 
Andaman e La Bara) from foseue 
ogee sen 0 sTRDe 
n Wet (Auta) from New Yorks. 
fan, 18, soft 
Dona Aurora (De La Rama) _ ftom Ate 


Gol 


. Jan, 2 

Flying pale (APL) from Ban Fram 
leno, « deepeces eng: Oita: RE 

Lalo Macrele ‘Gubeen) from New Yerk,.. 
Feb. 22. 7) 

Priam (B, & 8.) from us, vie Manila, 

| Pad. Jan. Ad : ‘ 

Philippine Bear (A.P.E.] 


» dan, 
Brant load! re C.P.L.) froma By 
eee jan, 26. 
Teleleert (J. PL) from B.. ‘America. 
Feb, 4, 
® ' AUSTRALIA. - : 
‘aonen (B. & 8.) from ‘Ausiralle via 
Manila wetedeneecenees Tam, 2Z 
Nellore (FE. A.) .T Australia apeses 
honey 


BRITT RUTIOH s&h “fo KuROPEAN 


“PORTS 
avert (‘B a 3.) from ux, San. bey 
Andre Lebon (M.ML) from Karope «e+ 
Mid. Feb.’ - 
Whesespr (Jandine’s),from,.U. Ry Yen. 2. 
Chrledan Bamy (ML) frosn 


ra, ( 
‘Brent rr fon. from Wa: Jan, 21, 
Glenartuey (Jardine’s) from London, vie 


Buen oe 
Glenns- (Serdine'a)  troea’ “Lon 


ee 
fan sane. cotta io 
4 Ye hace, 


ns Peery nr 
se 


Greate Ll: & Od fre, "panne won 
eres (2 2) Gee 
Bansold a eaty front shal Jou. U 


"SHIPPING, INTELLIGENCE 


IL. JNG scHEDU ae 


ae a AN ENG) 
Jaa,” 


4 Briton = Victory (A.P.L.),, Ban 
: and Loa Angeles 


Maa Pee. (Aes): ‘to nex. ‘and 
Havana via, Mente ‘and Singapore, 

Marioe. Herallow APL} 

pulte. ‘Transport’ (iatdine’s) S: Les 
Angeles ang. dan 

+ Shanghbel and, ™ 

Aipltfire (U.8.L.) 

Butprise (APL) be 8. Franclios vie 
Yokohama, 


Pree, Phatw (A.PL.) to 8. Frandlace. 
Paine pores 4) to Ban Frans 


Phil nia Beason (Jardin 
+ — Ban. Francleco, 
Philippine ‘Transport (Jardiewsy - 
ge ds and San Francieco, via 
bel 
Andsinan (0. te Rama) ta Autantis 
vt nPortae, pepe 
eld (Bink Lins) to Bio Prine 


Late Jan. Donw Auterts (De. La Rama) 
i ta U.6. ww Atlantla Ports, 
Clovis Victory (A.P.L,) to. Ban Fran- 
lace, 
Pres, Cleveland (A.P.L,) 
Francieco, . x 
Geaeral Gerdon-(A.P.0.)¢;.8an Fran: 
‘ elsco via Manila aad Honotuln | 
Fiylax: Drees, (AP.L.) to, Ban Frane 
: man Anstia. |... 
a pee p Basen “(Maersk Line)... 
New York sand Atfentle Ports. 
Pree, | McKinley (A.P.L,) to 
{ Franclaco. . , n A 
Don Aurora (De-' La 
Atlantic Ports. 
Tree, Tock (A.P.L,) to, New York. 
‘ Phillppine, Bear (A.P.0.), to Ban 
t _ Francleco and “tos ‘Angeles, * 


to Ban 


Ban 


Rama) te 


Mount Darla, (A.P.LA) 0, New! Yard. 
“Linfield Victory (Jurdine’s) to Bao 
a Franeleso, ° 
Teselbers (CPL). to B,, America 
i vla Manila, . Singapore, atc, 
Gen, Malgn (AIA) to, San Frane 
elsco, 
Marchen . Maersk. (Maersk Line), New 
< York and, Alisntic. Ports. 
Pree. Mokintey (APL) 
Franelaco. 
Marina =. Snapper = (AP...) ,...New 
York and Havane vin Singapore, 
Jombn, Cochin, Bombay, Suen and 
i wditerranisn Ports, 
28 China ‘Transport (Jardine’s) to Loa 
\ Angeles and Gan. Francisco... 
20 Pres, Polk (A.P.L.) to New York. 


to Ban 


Mar. 

10 Ruys- (JC.P.L) to 6. Amerfes. 

18 Pacifle Transport (Jardine’s) to Los 

t «Angele and fan Frapeisoo.,, F 

25 Philipplye Trenaport | Jardings),. to 
Toe Angeles and Bep Prancisco, 

' s0UTH AFRICAN PORTS 


Feb. 
g a Teawbers (0.P.L) to South, 


ae mee vet 


10° Ruys OPE) to 8 Afrlean ports. 


\ caNADiAN PORTS 


De 
1 Take ee (Jarding’a) wo. Var 


11 Lake Geaten (Jardine'a) 1d Varcoyear. 
AUSTRALIAN & SOUTHEEN 


(PHILIPPINES * tied SOUISEN) 


eA. 1 x: ite ah ts tbat, 


8. in Mi cae (fea 
Al Gertrude: Mavzs! incl te to’ Moalle: 


Philppine Trankport (rents 


idee Meera (Sabera) to “Moata's 
fay 

Mau Bang (dardine's) to Sandakan, 

Nellore (B. & A.) to Austra}ia, 

Hin’ Seng i(Jariine’s) eat Aandakan, 

Rae (B. & 86.) Sydney and 

Oey 


Bins & T nhdirean FORTS 


pAmet re 


Eotirts ee 


ahs wir ON 
t Empire Wihagy (aedthe's 
a onan i Nopaatig (Jardine’s) to 


eda ie « 2) to. Bhangbal, 
Hal. ane -(Dovaias to swiits, 

Trevetboe (P.: & 9.) ,to Bhanghaf, 
Quare, (P. & PD.) to ;Amoy, 1 


Van Heutan (40.7.1) 

and Yokohama, 
‘nrevetioe GP, & G); erry 
JAPAN PORTS 


wie, 


to Beal 


gg. ZBeAbeaNa” ; 


Yo wha} 


PASSAGE swEFA ns 
o/8 a taht wis 


INDO.CHINA S.N. "CO., LTD. 
SAILINGS 
Bie ec 


eeto Shanghat Noo 6 r? ° 
»to Shanghal, ob aie a 


& Yokohama ‘Noon ott aN: 


8.8: 
oe 


(aan Nets 3 
88. ““WINGSANG” scomsiogeeontO Keelung 
3 ' & Shanghai 


8.8. vitiNANG” depietiats vereoaet Sandakan . 
ATRIVALS 
8.6. “RMERE WITHAM” .........from Calcutta, Btralta. 


Bal : 
S., CHAKSANG? ..... ; alcon | ath pam. cuk da 
9.8. “WINGSANQ” . fr ‘ aia 


eee 1 & K 13 

8.8. “HANGBANG o......ee ftom. Ke fe Jans 

vty me or arr . 

8.8, “KUTSANG” nm Caleutt ath Jn 
2ath ian. 


ais enppfrom Calcutta 
tor: MADRAS 


i 8 & Stralts 
Cargo accepted, on Through Bills of. Laing 
AN, 
LADHADDATU ond SEMPORNA via Sandekane AA 


28rd Jan. - 


aoeeeennecees 


via Singapore and for KUDAT, JESSELTON, LA 


Général Managers . 
AUSTRALIA CHINA LINE LTD. 


4 
“miNbUsTAN” . Loads for Labuan  Sandalan 
and = Australlan _ Porta,. about, 
With Jnn. accepting, cargo an 
through Bits of Lading for 
New Zenland and Fil. 
v.Loady Adelaide (7th Jan.) Mele 


bourne, Sydney, bane. 
Sails about 3st inl 


Due Hong Kong about 26th Feb, 


Agents: GLEN LINE LTD. 


SAILINGS 

Straits & Suez about ime ne 

End February, 
via Suez & Stralts due 6th A Hee 
aseseenea soeBalled from London 14th. Den. 

“GLENARTNEY” .........8alled from’ Londan 

Feb. for Port 5a ald Straits Hong 
Port Sald, Straits, Hone Kong 


. CRABTRISTAN ......c000. 


“DENDIGHSHIRE” 


: “QLENARTNEY” 


v, “DENBIGHSHIRE” 
“GLEN ABE" 
“RITEXENOR” 


Antwerp & Rotterdam 
tal Ports via Strafts &. 
som oniled from Loniton, 
vin Suez & Straits! due lkte Jan. 
22nd Jan, 
Gi¢nstrae Leaves London ised 
"GLENSTRAE” Leaves, London . 3rd, Feb, for 


seenloads for Casablanca, ioraén, 
sonveedoands for London & Contl ii 
ARRIVALS N 
serccsesceeessoeeSalled = from London 6th Deo, 
vin . Suez &- Straits d e iaboat 
- via Suez & Straits due an aiid, Dec. Dee, 
Kong & Shangh 
& Shanghai. 


worn Ag jents: 
"WESTERN CANADA STEAMSHIP Co.; itd: 


SSLAKE WINNIPEG | Due from... Yancouijat 
via 2: Shanghai... 
oabs. a see 

or 

: ‘ VER direct. 9 Jan. 

8.8. “LAKE CANIM” tees dads for ect Sth. about ie . 

; January if sufficient induo 

88, “LAKE LILLOOET” .......k0nds for Pacitle Const: Porta & 


Yancouver Lato....January: if 
sufficient inducemertft. ‘ 


Subject to alteration without notice. 


an “{ntenaing Paisengers, are requested to register their names 7 


far da posatle, tn adganie of the Ame at which they wish to leaow.. 


Agents: ° 
PRINCE LINE LTD... 
PACIFIC TRANSPORT LINES ING. 
ion General Agents: . 
“BRITISH O OVERSEAS. AIRWAYS cone, 


SEE SEPARATE ADVERTISEMENTS. 


aia pnb ace 


C TRANSPORT UNES 


er TRANS PACIFIC SERVICE 


jsut 


- “CHA. TRANSPORT? 


Dué from Facitic Coast its Jan. 


NOW. LOADING 
haat -FOR) 


Devi ANGELES : 


Jevtag! 


Seti 9 shan ai only). L 
ey On ee oe if sie 


Pea POETS IN er 


wae 


ia Jaa, “ghia 


a se 


Ma (Oe 
MATHES 


.O 
AICI OCOLOMS 
THE LONG 
ROAD LOSES 


ITS LURE | 


London, Jan. 5. 

Street traders, {tinerant 
musicians, shoe-blacks and 
flower girls began to report 
to Inbour offices through- 
out Mritain today, under 
the Government's registra- 
tion for employment orders. 
designe) to guide the ped- 
dlers into Industry. 

The order, affects men under 
50 and women under 40, ‘They 
have a week in which to regis- 
ter, 

Next week, men and wamen 
working for betting establish: 
ments, night clubs, dancing and 
amusement saloons, ant football 
pools mun register. ‘The follow. 
jog week will be the turn of 
young people “with no Kaintul 
puratit, “Reuter. 


Britain 
May Quit 
Earlier 


London, Jan. 5. 
It is possible that Bri- 
_tain may cad the Pales- 
tine mandate a week or 
' 10 days before the pre- 


Tbe sent deadline of May 15, 


it was 
learned 
day. 


authoritatively 
in London _ to- 


These quarters, boweser, fay 
that there is no likelihood that 
the date could be advanced by 
ax much as six weeks ax has 
been suggested by recent re- 
ports frem Jerusalem. 


The precise date of Britain's 
handing over will elviously de- 
pend on how soon the United 
Nations Commisslon could ar- 
rive in Palestine and take over 
the administration. | 


‘The ‘ithdrawal (of British 
treops, Which depends on such. 
physical considerations as the 
removal of warlike stores and 
making provisions for gather- 
ing the citrus crop, might not 
be completed before Ang. 1, it 
was thought. 


If Jowish-Arab yucrilla war- 


fare persists, the final evacua-| opencd at least 150 -letters on 


tion date may .be diiayed still 
longer.—Reuter. 


THE PERKECT 
SWISS WATCH 


WLS REGISTER FIRST 


~ERRORLESS 


“Grandstand”) ' 
Wahoos pounded Bee hurler Audrey Brooks 
for 22 hits to set a new high 


me this season, denting the rubber 
33 times. In 


B 
ae (By 


any one 
no less than 


for runs scored in 


this massacre, the 


Owls also registered the first errorless game 


recorded since Softball was re-organ 


the War. 

Of the 26 batters that faced 
Wahoo mound-sce Terry Noron- 
ha, two reached home while 
three were left stranded on the 
sacka. The Owls took tho op- 
portunity of fattening up their 
averages and Hilda Soares’ four 
safetics in wix attempts swelled 
her average to .500, to tle with 
Wildcat Effie Babidh for second 
rung in the batting race. 

Both Elva Lee and Audrey 
Breoks registereg their frat hit 
of the season in this memorable 
tilt, ‘Terry Noronha on the 
mound for the victors wiffed one 
only, and that was atarry Bee 
short-stop rene Machado, who 
atoned for her lapse by ac- 
counting for two of her team- 
mates’ five safetics, Audrey 
Brooks for the losers willed two 
ang walked seven, 

Starter 

The Waheos started the ball 
rolling by batting: around, twice 
in the initial frame to chalk up 
18 markers on seven hits and 


scored in every frame except 
pce ae A eS 


Congressman 
Goes Out 


e 
Snooping 
Washington, Jan, 5. 

The Chairman of the special 
House Committee investigating 
marke! trading (Representative 
August Il, Andresen) left the 
capital on a “Sherlock Holmes” 
sleuthing mission today to see 
if any Government employees 
have been gambling in grain 
under “fictitious names.” 

Rep. Andresen said that his 
one-man snooping tour was 
aimed at digging up. more in- 
formation on the lists of spe- 
cvlators alrendy made public 
“and other information we re- 
ceived in addition.” 

“There undoubtedly are cer- 
tain Government employees who 
may be operating under rather 


fictitious names,” the Minnesota 


Republican said, “f may 

naying Sherlock Holmes before 
I am through. This thing is 
getting bigger and bigger, 1 


the subject today, giving more! BEES 


information.”—United Press. 


Soccer Fixtures 


The following are the Soccer 
Qxtures for this week:— 
c EDNESDAY, JAN. 7 
i. JUNIOR. SHIELD RE-PLAY 
- . Kit Chee v. C, Cadre, Navy, 3.30 


pm. 
Het:—F.A, Barretto.” 
SATURDAY, JAN. 10 


FIRST DIVISION 
RAF, v, South China, Sookun. 


o, 4 pm. 
t.1—-F.H. Pullock; Linesmen: 
. George. 
Buffs, Navy, 4 p.m. 
. Brogan; Linesmen:— 
SM. Watson/RS.M. Ewin, 
a Wah v. 28th R.A, Police,- 
Dm. ‘ ‘ 
t—J.F, de Silva; Linosmen: 
Xavior/N, Delgado, 
v, K.M. Bus, 


be! 
SECOND 
HQLF. v, RAO. 
‘2.30 pam. \ 
“Kit Choe” is 
. 2.80 Dp. 


Sookunpoo, 
i 1 - 


Ree Cuittney, eas 
©. Cadre v. Sing ‘Tuo, H. Valkey, 
> eal 


fi) * 


= ~ (Pollge 10.30 am,)., ae: 


SECOND DIVISION “‘A” 

Navy v. Taikoo, Navy, 2.30 p.m. 
Ref.:—A, Farmer. 

Eastern v. Police, Police, 2.30 
Pam, ia : 
Reti—AF. Willis, 

Dockyard v, W.D. Chinese, ,Soo- 
kunpoo, 2.30 p.m. 

Ret.:—H. Bilsby. 
SECOND DIVISION “B” 

South China vy, Signals, C, Hill 4 


p.m. ‘ 
Ret.:—C. Redman, 
25th RA. v, RLME., H, Valley, 


4 pm : 
Ref.:—S.M.1. Easton. 
Club (Byo). oo oh 
The following are the fixtures 
for the School Football Lengue:— 
SUNDAY, JAN. 11. 
SENIOR DIVISION - 
St, Joseph's a Queen's 


ef.3 ir, J. 
St, Peaul’s v, EK. 


ACAM, v, St. Joseph's 

am.) 
Ying-kee, 

St. Poul’s v, EKAAM.. 2 UTY 
(Navy 1, 11.30 am.)! 
Rof.:—Farmer, : “ik 

Wantsal AM. v, St, Stephens 

(C,. Hill, 10.15 a2.) : 

Ref.:—Chan _Tak-fal, 


(Navy 2, °10.15 ‘a.m 
> Ref.:—Tsang King-hon.- *-- 
Wah Yon v. Wantsal. P.M. Sc! 
+ (Navy.:2, 111,80: am.) 


Rof.:—Farmer, : 


aes 
elk 


Rel—W . i fiat 

nike 
wBulgaran 

Mabie and cathal: ald 


| base, ang 
*Castilho executed an unassisted 


| Chang; Ohun. asking him to in- 
~~ Kian, 


ised after 


the Jast inning when a fash of 
classy fielding nipped a further 
Wahoo outbrenk. 

Bee third-sacker Yollie Franco 
hag an off day, and committed 
five errors, In the fifth, it was 
apparent that Yollic was not 
feeling well, and coach Eddic 
Marques relieved her with T. 
Baptista. ‘Yollie banged our a 
two-bagger in the first but was 
left’ stranded ang Celsa Mon- 
teiro grounded out to first- 
sacker Hilda Soares. 

Irene Machado denteg the 
rubber for the first Bee tally 
when she singled, pilfered 
second, aud rode home on the 
wings of a flelder’s choice. 
Gloria Silva,; who dished up 
some aparkling catches In the 
Bee | centre-garden, necounted 
for the other run when she 
singled, stole second and sneak- 
ed home while Hilda Soares was 
bowled over when she hung on 
to Terry Noronha’s toss to first 
to retire Audrey Brooks. 

Two sparkling double killings 
were dished up hy the Owls. 
The first was in the second 
frame when Irene Castilho 
froze Carol Xavier's «liner 
through the windy alley and 
tossed the apple to Hilda Soares 
nt first to catch Brooks off 
again when Irene 


twin-killiIng by clamping her 
mitts on. Brooks clothes-line 
drive and tagged Cynthia Luz 
off the keystone. 

Batting honours yo to hurler 
Terry Noronha with 2 three in 
four performance with the stick, 
while Alda Castro and Hilda 
Soares were good for four-in- 
seven and four-in-six efforts, 
which Included homers. 


Box Scores 


3 
s 


WAHOOS 
A. Castro 
v. Noronhe 
HH, Boares 
1, Caatilho 
P. Ribeiro 
H. Olsen 
E, Thompson 
FE, Xavier 
G. Wingtee 
R. Xavier 
Elva Leo 


Lesscanaaaes® 
Blass acusansag 
| coomaonatno 
Slecomococoroamy 


a 
= 
fo) 


Runs 
Hits 


se 


nw 
TE | na ca ce co co ets et 
aeas 
ws 


Seco 


3 
lonocceconmopri {i 


1, Ferreira 
A. Xavier 
. BDaptleta 


sore 


C. 


s 
al cumononosomhun | worNNORNAUA 
founaue 


CP nl ann omac0coR,,,, 
oo 

oon 

~o 

we 


1 
Hits 1 
» Noronha | 3, 


Rune Batted Int Castro - 
Bi Castilho 2 


s 


Noronha 4, 

Soares: 2, fastlibo 5, Ribeiro 1, 
‘Thompaon ‘8, Xavier E. 3, Wing! te 3, 

_  R, Xavier 1, Leo 3, Machado 1, Bilva 


2. 

Bacrifice Hits: Notonhe, Soares. 

Home Runs: HL Scares, A, Castro. 

Two bese Hits: Y. Franco, A. Castro, a 
Xavier. % 

Double Playa; Custitho to Soarea In 2nd, 
Castilho unssslated In 7th. 


Btruck eat byt Brooks 2, Noronha 3. 
Piret on bella: Off Brooks 7. 

Paneed Dalla; Monteiro 1. 

Latt en Basses Wahoos 10, Bees 3, 
Unptres: Philo. Ramedios, Bill Woo, Hilt. 


i - 
Scorert. Hal Winslee. ° . 


S‘HAL RICE PRICE 
RISE. CAUSES STIR 


.° Shanghal, Jan. 5. \ 
Alarmed’ by ‘the ‘rapid rie in 
the rice price-{n Shanghal in the 
past few~ days," Mayor K.C.Wu 
hos , telegraphed . to Premier 


“: Wu ‘Kat-shich 
tal Affairs Bureau 


mie 


te} 
leer uuoronentiGea! coooccecoook® 


Ribeiro 2, ]"* 


ye 


" WONG KONG, TEUSDAY, JANUARY 6, 1948. 


| Double 


. vuwdeswell is seen 
falling from “Battling 
Pedulas” (right) and V. 
Mooney from “First of the 
Dandies” during the King 
George VI steeple chase at 
Kempton Park, Middlesex 
(Bngland) Dec. 26. 
Photo. . 


England — 
v Wales 
Changes 


London, Jan. 5. 

The England Rugby selectors 
have made two changes in the 
side to meet Wales at Twicken- 
ham on January 17 as compar- 
ed with that defeated by Aus- 
tralia on Saturday. 

The alterations are both in 
pack. where Kelly and Lusa re- 
place Evans and_Mycock. 

The Team is: E, Newman, R. 
Guest, N. Bennett, E. Scott, D. 
Sworhrick, T. Kemp, R. Madge, 
G. Kelly, J. Keeling, H. Walker, 
H. Luya, S. Perry, M, Steele- 
Lodger, D. Vaughan and B. 
Travers.—Reuter. 


By Red 


Trouble: | 


Australia Wins 


Third 


By 233 


Australia won the third Test by 233 runs toda 


CAPTAIN 


|B. u. 


Test 
Runs 


Melbourne, Jan. 5. 


. 


y- 


Trapped of a sticky wicket for the third suc- 
cessiv 


e match in the seri 


out in their second 


India were skittled 


C8, 
for 125 runs in 


innings 


under two hours and Australia won by 233 


runs. 

Readman declared the Auatratian 
innings closed ‘at Saturday's score of 
255 ‘for four, following heavy week- 
end rain which soaked the wicket. 

Australia have now won two Tents, 
with one drawn. 


.__ Scores 
AUSTRALIA—FIRST = INNINGS 


394 
AUSTRALIA—SECOND _INNINGS 
255 FOR FOUR DECLARED. 
INDIA—FIRST INNINGS 291 FOR 
NINE DECLARED. 
INDIA—SECOND INNINGS 
Mankad, b. Bill Johnston ... 
cents: b, Bill Johnston .. a 
‘ul Mohamed, ¢. Morris, b. Ian 
Johnson assosetavsrecoteevensasavnees 


Little Assembly 
Faces Boycott 


Puppets 


Lake Success, Jan. 5. 


ENE al monte sit rei ee fie Ire) one, ees one va 
rn - ; 
feehin, Connittee- y one y Fok e In-| con of Winois, anid that it is o 


the first 


time today under: the shadow of total boy- 


, cott by six Eastern Eu: 


the Soviet Union. 


The first session of. the “Little Assembly,” set up 
by the General Assembly ‘in November to 
function between its main eccgaone yet expect- 


ed only to concern procedure an 


of ‘officers. "’' : 
Dr. ‘Louis Padilla Nervo, of 
Mexico, is the favourite choice 
{ for president, with M, Farnand 
Van- Lengenhove, of Belgium, 
Las the second-most likely; possi- 
bility.” ° a ae, 
The appointment of a small 
United : Nations “on ‘the - spot”, 
ycommsal 4 n= 
dia’s complaint. against Pakls- 
tan, alleging . ‘intervention -in’ 
Kashmir, is expected to be the 
first urgent ‘step taken -by:-the 
Security Counci! when it meets 
on Tuesday, according to well- 
informed sources. a \ 
+ United Nations senior offictals 
are not‘ enthuslastic about thé 
idea of a Kashmir commission 
because. 
ready seriously depleted by the 


al] ‘Balkan, ‘Korean | and Patestine 
:] Commissions, : but’ they -belleve 


sit: would. be ‘difilcult for.- the 
Beturity Council to arrive at an 
‘objective . opinion, merely. . by 
hearing ‘charges .and’. counte 
charges. round. @ tables +i + 

::a- preliminary. debate 
‘4¢ ‘Is consSderad 


their, numbers: aro. al«} Po 


e election 


in view of Britain's special: in- 


terest in a‘dispute between’ two |. 


cominions. , , . 
iThe hopa is still expressed 
that if the Security Council sots 
up a, commission, both parties 
will agree to a round-table’ con- 
ference aiming at a settlement 
he—dispute-by—negotia 
and conciation, as provided in 
the Charter—Reuter. . ae 
VISIT CANCELLED 
A 38 ‘Singapore, Jan. 4. 

Mr. 
Secretary of State for Alr,. haa 
cancelled his proposed visit to’ 
Malaya after the Burma Inde- 
ndence © colobrations—which 
he is. attending as representa- 
tive of the British Government 
owing to 'a change of plang,". 
it was announced here todsy— 

NKS... 

‘The Mother Superior afd 

Canohiian’ mepaed wish 
” : A 


ropean countries, led by; 


Arthur Henderson, thes eald.' 


Hozare, c. Barnes, b. Miller .... 
Amarnath, b, Lindwall te 
Phadkar, c. Barnes, b, Bill Johne- 
ton 
Lindwall, b. 


Adikhari, 
“Fallon; b. Hill 


10 
8 


an 
Johnson 
Rai 8ingh, 
JOnmst rh osssses seseseensnecsscsseegeetersriese 
Rangnekar, c. Hamence, b. lan ®. 
Johnaon in dvadanbdtsuawieesiccesoesbecsatce 
Sen, c, Hassett, b, Tan Johnron 
Nayudu, not out . 
ERP Ae corsceseeone 


Cc. 


Total 
" BOWLING 


Miller 
Bill Johns 
Lindwall 
Tan John 
v —Reuter. 


FOREDOOMED TO 
FAILURE ? 


Washington, Jan. 5. 

A high-ranking Republican sald 
today that the Marshall Plan is 
‘foredoomed to failure”, and pre. 
dicted that eventually if - would 
cost the United: States about 20 
times of much as President Tru- 
man estimated. : 

Chairman Loo E. Allen, of the 


folly “to think that we can change 
the Russian intentions by spond- 
ing money in Eu 
yeare, They Marshall Plan is the 
derinning of a programme which 
will cost the United States $200,. 
000,000,000 and run-for 20 years.” 
—United Press. . : 


“CORPS OF 
“MERCENARIES” 

as Paris, Jan. 5. 
» The.-Communiat newspaper 
1 ‘Humanite today described the 
dispatch.of American Marines 
to the ;Mediterranean as tho 
sending of .an “éntire corps of 


e for fivo 


morcenaries by the masters of mind, 


-Wall. Street.” ; 
‘Thus American interventt 
in Grosce fs no longer concerned 


‘| simply with ‘masalve ‘allocations 
of. arms and munitions and the* 


sending .of ‘advisers’ to com- 
mand | fhe fascist ‘hordes," it 
Other’ newspapers here did 
not ‘carry the ‘ announcement.+ 
‘United Press. .. ee 


NEWS 


: London, Jan 6. 
! (News ,Chronlcle, Libcrat 
‘newspapor, announced 
ight thet Mr. R. J. Crutk- 
oi, Wartime Di 
r'can division of the. Minis, 
tyne Tnférmation,’,;has "been 
n director. . 


‘ clates 


‘NZ RUGBY = 


Director of tht] ¢, 


|. > ‘prorocrdrny 
ASIA PHOTO S 


10 Ide House Bt. 


'S CUP 


WILL BE 
DECIDED 


UPPLY | 
_ Tel, 88188 | 


‘ 


‘4 


AT FANLING 


Tho 1947 Captain's Cup final takes’ place on Satur-* 
day when A. Bro 


N. 


wn and.E. T. McMullen ° 


decide who is to be the owner of a handsome 


up. . 
Over oe week-end, Brown 
beat W. G: Robertson ¢ 
MeMullen beat the ‘giant killer’ 
Morahan ,by the same 
Both finalists play off 
the ‘samo handicap . and al- 
though there is a wide dis- 
parity between their styles, the 
margin at the ond: should bo 4 
close one, either way. 

Entries open:.this week and 
close on Jan, 24 for a mixed 
foursomes tournament” which 
will be on the knock-out prin- 
‘ciple. Entrants must be in 
possession of 
c 


margin. 


‘ pet part: 


s 


ceipt of 
membern, 
are O28 
date in thelr diaties. 
New Role 
The terms of a new rule, re- 
between the 


Goodwin Sands °- 


rents. : 
that certain 
ding the’ 


finalisation. . . 
Commander R. S.. Barry RN. 
nseumed  secrotarial duties os 
from Jan. 1 and was seen W 
a purposeful Jook in his eye out 
on the courses over the week- 
end. ey ' 
The comment last week about 
the doubt regarding the rules 
of golf has stirred up some in- 
torest “and ‘{n the clubhouse on 
Saturday the conversation turn- 
ed to various points. How wide 
a divergence in views there was 
until the book was produced! 
For example some ome quoted 
ont ball, lost hole! with  re- 
gard to match play, apparently 
unaware. that this old rule 
ceased to hold’ good as from 
quite a. few years before the 
war, : 
~-- > Rule Says. - 
Preserit Rule 22 says, with a 
proviso regarding a’ball in a 
water hazard, that if a ball be 
‘ost or be deemed by-the play- 
er to be unplayable, the player 
shall play ‘his ndxt stroke as 
nearly as possible at the epot 
from wh: 1 the bail was play-' 
ed, adding a penalty stroke in 
other: words ‘stroke and dis- 


tance! ' 2 
- The Fanling Local Rule is in 


Sport Here 
ga ti Jamaica, Jan, 4 

Kidgston, Jamaica, Jan, 4. 
. George. Headley, West -Indios 
cricket star, wil] not play in the 
Test. match against the cc 
tourists in Britlsh Guiana start- 
ing on’ March 3. oy 
This was made known ‘today 
and is a further chapter in the 
story which began - wheo Head- 
ley said that ho would not play 
in matahes against the: tourlats 
except’ in, ‘Jamaica. ‘He was 
Jaier persuaded ‘to change his 
‘Headley. ‘has been’ nominated 
ap! : ‘eatin tha 
Barbados ‘starting. on “January 
21 and in’ 
Jamaica, ata’ 
—Reuler. ' a 


e's 


- >, Poulouse, Jan. 4. 5 
New Zealand's Rugby Leanue: 
touring side ‘Jost to a Pyrenocs 
Langusdor vi combination * here 
this afternoon by 15 ‘points ta 
nil—-Reuter, “se ean 
SCULLERS © 
Ps West’Palm 


Arporicds 
mp! 
1 


Jack Kelley 
ond 


winner ‘of *.the 
ate * 


co 


4-320 | AAAAAAPARARRPDLLDDID 


-¥ 


APPEAL TO 
CHRISTIANS — 
‘IN CHINA 


Shanghal, Jan. 5..-°s 

The Government spokes- 
man, Hollington Tong, in # 
radlo speech’ ht, 


in 


post-war handi-| . 


as tha 

Communist camp.’—United  ,. 

Press. ‘ wy 4 
POPPPPPPPEOIPLADLE é 

Rescue 


Deal, Kent, Jan. 4. 
Lifeboatmen, who spent two * 
sleepless nights buffeted .: by 
heavy acas as they stood by the - 
2,327-tons Italian steamer Sil- 
vin. Onorato, firmly aground on 


tth | the treacherous Goodwin Sanda, 


tonight brought the crew of the 
vessel ashore. : 


Since Friday afternoon, the 
Italian skipper had stubbornly 
refused all appeals to abandon 
ship. : oi * 

Lying in between two “sand-, 
banks, tho — Silvin Onorato, 
heavily-lnden with 2,088 tons | 
of lend ore, ,deficd’ the efforts 
of three Dover tugs to heave 
her clear.—Reuter, res 


a ‘ Va 7 
accordance with the above. - An- 
other point was ‘when does: 8 - 
ball. move’? ‘The relative: de- 
finition statea “a ball ts deem- 
od to have moved if jt Jeaves,,, 
{t's position and come to rest. in 
any other place.” me 

Owing to the lack of support ‘ 
{thas been found necessary. to 
discontinue tho Faniing morte 
ing special Rail Bus at 8.82 0! 
Sunday. and ‘membors propos: .. 
ing to travel by rail oro as 
to note that the morning train 
for Fanling is now 8.40 arrive 4 
ing at Sheung Shui 9.40 3 


kept near, ‘the’. 

tenders for six furlongs ‘and: 
then came ‘away to’ win in’. 84° 
seconds. 7 mye 
“The winner - carried « elght.. 
atone three and patd $14.20 for’: 
a §2 tckot.—Rauter. ° : 


tion 
ore) 


i 


