Approved For Reléase 2000/08/26 : cia RDPe1so0s27acomzadettea clies 


- AAA 16 ~ CHINA: COMMUNIST 
Sept. 16, 1954 


ROSTER OF PRESIDIUM OF FIRST CONGRESS 


Peking, Chinese Home Service, in Mandarin, Sept. 15, 1954, 1510 GMT--W 
(Text ) 


Peking--Following is the roster of the Presidium of the first session 
of the First National People's Congress of the People's Republic of China: 
(The, Presidium consists of Of persons and they are listed in order of the 


sonia strokes in Chinese characters representing each surname-- 
Peking 


Mao Tse-tung, Wang Tsung-lun, Ssutu Mei-tang, Chu Te, Chu Te-hai, 

Ho Hsiang-ning, Wu Yu-chang, Wu Yao-tsung, Soong Ching-ling, Li Ssu- 

kuang, Li Hsien-nien, Li Shun-ta, Li Te-chuan, Li Chi-shen, Li Chu-chen, 
Shen Yensping, Shen Chun-ju, Chou Wen-chiang, Chou En-lai, Lin Chiao- 

chih, Lin Po-chu, Lin Piao, Lin Feng, KO-chi-mu-ku, Chu Ko-chen, Liu Ya-tau, 


Hu Tzu-ang, Hu Yao-pang, Fan Yung, Wei Kuo-ching, Hsu Hsiang-chien, 
Hsu Te-li; 


Hsiang-chi-yueh-hsi, Ulanfu, Panchen Ngoerhtehni Lozong Chinglie Lhundrub 
Chujijiatsan, Ma Hsu-lun, Ma Yin-chu, Kao Chung-min, Tsui Chien-kung, 
Chang Chih-chung, Chang Hsi-jo, Chang Wen-tien, Chang Nan-hsien, Chang 
Lan, Liang Hsi, Mei Lan-fang, Chang Po-chun, Hsi Chung=hsun, Hsu Kuang- 
ping, Hsu Te-heng, Ko Mo-jo, Chen Shao-min, Chen Shu-tung, Chen Shao- 
kuan, Chen Yun, Chen Ching-yu, Chen Chia-keng, Chen I, Fu Tso-i, 

Chi Wen-fu, Peng Chen, Peng Te-huai, Peng Tse-min, Sheng Pei-hua, Cheng 
Chien, Hua Lo-keng; 


Ho Lung, Huang Chang-shui, Huang Yen-pei, Yang Ming-hsien, Yeh Chien- 
ying, Tung Pi-wu, Dalai Lama Ngawang Lozong Dantzem Jiatso, Yung I-jen, 
Hsiung Koewu, Liu Shao-chi, Liu Po-cheng, Liu Ko-ping, Liu Hung=sheng, 
Liu Lan-tao, Ou Pai-chuan, Tsai Ting-kai, Tsai Chang, Teng Tzu-hui, 
Teng Fang-chin, Teng Pao-shan, Kung Tien-min, Lai Jo-yu, Lung Yun, 

Po I-po, Hsieh Chueh-tsai, Sai Fu-ting, Han En, Han Wang-chen, Nieh 
Jung-chen, Lo Jung-huan, and An Ping-shan. 


The secretary general of the first session is Li Wei-han. 
LIU SHAO-CHI DRAFT CONSTITUTION REPORT 


Peking, NCNA, in English Morse to Southeast Asia, Europe, and North 
America, Sept. 15, 1954, 1420 GMT--W 


(Text) 


Peking, Sept. 15--Page one~-The National People's Congress today heard 

@ report on the Draft Constitution of the People's Republic of China 

by Liu Shao-chi, speaking for the Committee for Drafting the Constitution 
of the People's Republic of China. 


Approved For Release 2000/08/26 : CIA-RDP61S00527A000200010065-4 


= Approved For Release 2000/08/26 : CIA-RDP61S00527A000200010065-4 7 


~ABA15 =  \ CHINA: COMMUNIST 
Sept. 16, 1954 


This ‘system of People's Congresses, which has brought the people of the 
whole country closely together, is the greategt guarantee for the building 
of a prosperous and happy Socialist State. f 

The development of a People's democratic me in China during the past 
> years is. prominently featured in ae ee Many articles on the 
functions of People's Congresses and Peopge's Government in urban and 
rural areas are carried. A sketch in the gPEOPLE'S DAILY shows that 85.38 
percent of China's population took part gin elections at the lowest level. 
Interviews with individual deputies to @he National People's Congress 


cover two entire pages of the supplemefit in today's Peking DAILY. 


The PEOPLE'S DAILY brings news of vigf 


wuory in the battle against the 
highest water level in 100 years alofe the middle reaches of the Yangtze 
River. In a message to the Central 


Meople's Government, the river fighters 
guarding the 133-kilometer-long dangerous section along the Yangtze 
River above the Tungting Lake, repgrt that the industrial city of 


wmillions of people living in this low- 


C3 


The Peking DAILY WORKER reports Heat the No. 1 Steel Smelting Plant of the 
Anshan Iron and Steel Company is, 
it will become a modern plant eagf 


the output of steel is expected 


aS, 


A dispatch from the Northeast Yi ning center of Penk says that a new 


found Oct. 1. 
ce 
The Peking DAILY WORKER also fins a column describing China's biggest 


department store, the No. 1 Sthte-owned Department Store in Shanghai. 


Its daily customers add up tojmround 100,000 the paper reports, but 
many more turn up on Sundays & 


mod holidays. Total sales this year— 
have quadrupled those of last 


In another editorial on foreie 


4en news, the PEOPLE'S DAILY says that the 
Soviet proposal of Sept. 10 Gp 


iling for a four-power conference to 
discuss the German question #nd the establishment of a system of collective 
security in Europe ig in thefinterests of the people of Europe. It 
declares that the rejection UY the French National Assembly of the 


EDC Treaty is a heavy blow to} the American aggresgive bloc. 


This paper also carries an 
in the past 10 years, inh 
other fields, 


Fticle on some of Albania's achievements 
f industry, agriculture, and cultural and 


53 


Ape 


Approved For Release 2000/08/26 : CIA-RDP61S00527A000200010065-4 


Approved For Reléase 2000/08/26 : CIA-RDP61S00527A000200010065-4 


- AAA LT - CHINA: COMMUNIST 
Sept. 16, 1954 


Liu Shao-chi described the adoption of the Constitution as the 
primary task of the present session of the Congress and a great 
historic event in the life of the Nation, The Draft Constitution 
would become the fundamental law of the State after adoption by the 
present session, he said. 


The Committee for the Drafting of the Constitution, headed by Comrade 
Mao Tse-tung, had been formed in January 1953 by the Central People's 
Government Council. in March this year the Committee had received 

a Draft Constitution from the Central Committee of the Comuaunist 

Party of China, After thorough discussion for 2 months by 8,000 
representatives of democratic parties, popular organizations, and others, 
a draft had been published for public discussion on July 1}. 


The present amended draft now before the session of the Congress was 
the result of more than 2 months of keen Nationwide discussion in which 
150 million people participated and took into consideration the 
numerous proposals and amendments that had been sent in and had 

been approved by the Central People's Government Council on Sept. 9. 
Liu Shao-chi first outlined the historic significance of the Draft 
Constitution. 


The Draft Constitution, he said, rested on the foundation of the complete 
victory won by the Chinese people in their prolonged struggle against 
imperialism, feudalism, and bureaucratic capitalism. It rested on the 
firm establishment of the People's democratic State led by the working 
Class and based on the worker-peasant alliance. It rested on the 
powerful Socialist economy which is playing a leading role in China's 
economic life, and the fact that theprocess of transformation has begun 
in the gradual transition toward Socialism. Based on these facts, Liu 
Shao-chi went on, China's Constitution was a Soctalist, not a bourgeois 
type of constitution, 


The present Draft Constitution embodied the historical experience both 

of the Chinese people's revolutionary struggle and the constitutional 
movement of China in the modern period. It embodied the interests and will 
of the Chinese people and of the greet changes in the country. It also 
drew from the experience of other countries, especially from that 

of the Soviet Union and the People's Democracies. 


The struggle between revolution and counterrevolution had never ceased 
during the past 100 yernrs or more. It was reflected, on the question 

of the State system, in three different constitutional forms demanded by 
three different social forces. 


Approved For Release 2000/08/26 : CIA-RDP61S00527A000200010065-4 


Approved For ReleaSé 2000/08/26 : CIA-RDP61S00527A000200010065-4 


- AAA 18 - CHiNA: COMMUNIST 
Sept. 16, 1954 


Page 2--First, there had been the bogus constitutions drawn up by 

the rulers of the Manchu Dynasty, the northern warlords and the 

Chiang Kai-shek Kuomintang, who were opposed even to bourgeois democracy 
and never really wanted a constitution. When these were on their 

last legs, they schemed to save themselves with the help of such bogus 
constitutions. They failed and all their "constitutions" became mere 
scraps of paper. 


Secondly, as regards the constitution of a bourgeois democratic republic 
which the Chinese national bourgeoisie in past years used to yearn for, 
Liu Shao-chi said that no such constitution had ever been established in 
Chine except for the provisional constitution that arose out of the 1911 
revolution. This was immediately scrapped by warlord Yuan Shih-kat. 

Many nations did become bourgeois republics after throwing off 

feudalism, Liu Shao-chi pointed out, However, this was a mere illusion in 
semicolonial and semifeudal China because the Chinese bourgeoisie was 
unable to lead the people to defeat the combined forces of foreign 
imperialism and domestic reactionaries, 


Thirdly, there is the constitution of a people's republic, led by 
the working class and based on the worker-peasant alliance, which 
the present session of the National People's Congress had before it for 
enactment, This democratic and Socialist constitution conformed to the 
interests of the overwhelming majority of the Chinese people. It 


soe ee the only genuine constitution China had ever had, Liu Shao-chi 
ated, 


The Draft Constitution also summed up the new historical experiences 
Since the founding of the People's Republic of China 5 years ago, during 
which period the common program adopted by the Chinese People's Political 
Consultative Conference in 1949 acted as a provisional constitution. 


In these 5 years, China had ended her former position as a colcny or 
vassal state under the rule of foreign imperialism, and because an 
independent State, She had emerged as a great power in the world. 
Together with the Soviet Union and the People's Democracies, she 

had become a bulwark in the defense of world peace. She had put an end 
to feudalism and long years of chaos and had achieved unprecedented 
unification over the entire mainland and unity among the nationalities, 


Where before the people had no political power, now in the main democracy 
had been built up. In 5 years, China had rehabilitated a national 
economy ruined by the imperialists and the Kuomintang reactionaries 

and started Socialist construction, thanks to the enthusiasm and 
initiative of the people and to the assistance of her great ally, the 
Soviet Union. 


Approved For Release 2000/08/26 : CIA-RDP61S00527A000200010065-4 


2 Approved For Release 2000/08/26 : CIA-RDP61S00527A000200010065-4 a 


- AAA 19 CHINA: COMMUNIST 
Sept. 16, 1654 


Page 3--The great changes during the past 5 years provided a vivid 
answer to a fundamental and repeatedly debated question in modern 
China--which way to go, capitalism or Socialism? The past 5 years had 
provided that the only correct road forward for China was to attain 
Socialism--in which the economy is single and unified--from the present 
society, in which the economic structure was complicated, Liu Shao-chi 
stated. 


In fact, China had entered on the road to Socialism and as from 1953 had 
entered into planned economic construction, with Socialism as the objective. 
Therefore it was necessary to take a step forward, on the basis of the 
common program, and make a constitution to affirm in legal form the central 
task of the State during the transitional period, which called for the 
step-by-step Socialist industrialization of the country, the gradual 
Socialist transformation of agriculture, handicrafts, and capitalist 
industry and commerce. 


Liu Shao-chi then gave some explanation of the basic content of the Draft 
Constitution. 


On the character of the State in China, Liu Shao-chi said the fact that 
it was led by the working class and based on the worker-peasant alliance 
indicated that China was a country of people's democracy in which the 
overwhelming majority were the true masters of the State, in sharp 
contrast with capitalist covntries, in which the ruling bourgeoisie 
formed only a minority. 


He described the broad people's democratic united front in China, and stressed 
the continuous strengthening of the worker-peasant alliance which: also 
included the alliance with individual handicraftsmen and other 

individuals engaged in nonagricultural labor. This was the basic 

guarantee for the successful leadership of the working class, he said. 


The People's Democratic United Front, he added, led by the working class 
and composed of all democratic classes, democratic parties and people's 
organizations--based on and broader than the worker-peasant alliance-- 
was playing an important role in China's transition period to Socialism. 


Liu Shao-chi said that a national bourgeoisie continued to exist in 
China during the transition period. But due to the specific historical 
conditions of China's oppression by foreign imperialism, there had 
been not only struggle but also alliance between the working class 

and the national beurgeoisie. The State also united patriotic people 
of all other class forms in society, especially those of the various 
national minorities. 


Approved For Release 2000/08/26 : CIA-RDP61S00527A000200010065-4 


Approved For Release 2000/08/26 : CIA-RDP61S00527A000200010065-4 __ 


- AAA 20 - CHINA: COMMUNIST 
Sept. 15, 1054 


The great revolutionary unity of the entire Chinese people, led by the 
working class, Liu Shao-chi pointed out, was necessary not only to the 
Chinese People's Revolution, but also to the realization of Socialism 
since imperialism still existed. Our Constitution must therfore be one 
“or the great unity of the people of the entire country in building a 
Socialist society, Liu Shao-chi declared. 


Dealing with the problem of building a Socialist society in a peaceful 
manner, Liu Shao-chi enumerated the forms through which Socialist trans- 
formation would be carried out. The cooperatives--a partial collective 
ownership by the working people--was the main form of Socialist 
transformation of agriculture and handicrafts, while capitalist industry 
and commerce were being transformed through State capitalism. 


Liu Shao-chi pointed ovt that as distinct from the capitalist countries, 
in China Socialist revolution covld te achieved not through the overthrow 
of the capitalist State system but through step-by-step Socialist 
transformation. This was because China was a people's democratic 

country led by the working class, vecause the Socialist economy owned 

by the State had already become the leading force ani the capitalist 
sector was not dominant in the national economy. 


Liu Shao-chi particularly referred to the Socialist transformation of 
capitalist industry and commerce that would take place step by step 

over a considerasle period through the various forms of State capitalism. 
Any member of the national bourgeoisie would have appropriate work, and 
the livelihood and work of any member of the national bourgeoisie who was 
willing to accept the Socialist transformation, observe the laws, and not 
undermine the people's property would be appropriately arranged by the 
State. They would not be deprived of their political rights. 


Our policy and methods in building Socialism were perfectly correct, Liu 
Shao-chi said, referring to the clamor by China's enemies, who had a ‘great 
dislike for her Socialist principles, and the disappointment cf sections 
o” the foreign capitalist press that China had taken the road traversed 
by the Soviet Union--the read that all human societies would inevitably 
take according to the laws of historical development. 


Liu Shao-chi next spoke on the Chinese people's democratic political 
system and the rights and duties of the people. 


= Approved For Release 2000/08/26 : CIA-RDP61S00527A000200010065-4 


ia Approved For Release 2000/08/26 : CIA-RDP61S00527A000200010065-4 a 


- AAA 2] ~ CHINA: COMMUHIST 
Sept. 16, 1954 


The people's congress system was the political syatem which conformed 
to the nature of the State. The Draft Constitution stipulated that 

all State organs, from the State Council to the Local People's ; 
Councils at the lowest level, were established, supervised, or removed 
from office where necessary by the National People's Congress or the 
Local People's Congresses elected by the people, 


The Standing Committee elected by the National People's Congress and the 
chairman of the People's Republic of China would jointly: ... 
perform the function and exercise the power of the head of the State, 


but neither of them had powers above those of the National People's 
Congress. 


Important State affairs were not decided by a single individual or a 
few individuals. Important affairs affecting the whole Nation had to be 
discussed and decided upon by the National People's Congress, or its 
Standing Committee, and important local affairs had to be discussed 
and decided upon by the Local People's Congresses. 


China's political system had a high degree of centralization, Liu 
Shao-chi stated, but it was based on a high degree of democracy. 


Criticizing some foreign bourgeois press comments on the Draft 
Constitution, he said these people measured China's political system 

by bourgeois standards and missed the biggest and most fundamental point-- 
the fact that the Chinese people, led by the working class, had become 

the masters in their country. 


Liu Shao-chi enumerated freedom of speech, the press, assembly, 
association, procession, and demonstration, enjoyed by the Chinese people 
and materially facilitated by the State as established in the Draft 
Constitution, in addition to a number of other rights including the 
freedom of religious belief. The broad masses of the people in any 
capitalist countries, he said, had not enjoyed and could not enjoy such 
broad individual freedom as the Chinese people enjoy. 


Our State gives every consideration to individual interests, he went on; 
the public interests of our State and society cannot diverge from 

individual interests. The State also gave every protection to the public 
interests of the country and society, which were the very foundation on 


which to satisfy the individual interests of the masses of the 
people, 


On the duties of the people, he said that the Chinese people have both 
full democratic power and full obligations toward the State. 


Approved For Release 2000/08/26 : CIA-RDP61S00527A000200010065-4 


Approved For Release 2000/08/26 : CIA-RDP61S00527A000200010065-4 


- AAA 22 - CHINA: COMMUNIST 
Sept. lo, 1554 


Page 5--Liu Shao-chi then noted that the age-old system of national 
oppression had been abolishei. Since the founding of the People's 
Republic of China, China had become a great family of free and equal 
nationalities, he declared. 


The Draft Constitution reflected the common interests of all the nationalities 
in China. It stated that Chisa was a unified, multinational State and that 
all the areas of national autonomy were inseparatle parts of the People's 
Republic of China. 


The Draft Constitution also insured that all the national minorities 
were genuinely able to exercise their right of autonomy wherever they 
live in numbers. 


Liv Shao-chi emphatically pointed owt that the Han nationality, who were 
more advanced than the other nationalities in political, economic, and 
sultural development, had the special obligation of helping the 
development of the fraternal nationalities. 


Building a Socialist society was the common objective o;} all nationalities 

of China, he went on. In view of the different historical conditions of 

the nationalities, the question o° when and how the Socialist transforma- 
tion would be carried ovt would vary. The people of the various nationalities 
must 2e free to follow their own desires in making their decisions, he 
stressed. 


me Constitution, reflecting the experience and aspirations of the 
people would be a great, active factor in the life of the Chinese 

state, Liu Shao-chi stated. + would be an inspiration to the mass of 
the people in their stivggle to safeguard and develop the fruits of 
China's victory, to smash all schemes of enemies who attempted to uncer- 
mine China's social and State systems, ani to strive for making China's 
construction more perfect and quickening its tempo. 


Liu Shao-chi said that the passage of the Constitution would lags, ee to 
the Chinese people and to China's friends throughovt the worlc. e 
Constitution established China's fundamental policy in international 
affairs as that of working for the cause of world peace and the progress 
of humanity. 


What China had achieved and would achieve would be helprul to the common 
cause for peace and progress of the people of the world, Liu Shao-chi 
said, and to strive for lasting world peace was a necessary condition for 
China's Socialist construction. 


Approved For Release 2000/08/26 : CIA-RDP61S00527A000200010065-4 


