Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 
COPY NO. zi 38 


FOR THE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
FOR REPORTS AND ESTIMATES 


CONF) a THAR 


an eay poe 


CURRENT SITUATION © 
IN MALAYA 


ey 


ane 


ORE 33-49 Document 


Published 17 November 1949 a : 
This documant has besa [] DSChASSIFI 
approved for celease throu’ #858. CHANGED 
the HISVORICAL REVXEH PROGREM of 
the Central Intelligence Lecany. 


pate Jin) 4 


ae ) fe. 4 


555) 


CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 
| CONE TIA 


SECRE 


eee 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


WARNING 


This document contains information affecting the na- 
tional defense of the United States within the meaning 
of the Espionage Act, 50 U.S.C., 31 and 32, as amended. 
Its transmission or the revelation of its contents in any ty 
manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited by law. 


ay 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 
s aptler 


4 
DISSEMINATION NOTICE 
1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient 
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient’s 
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further 
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa- 
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following: 
a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for 
the Department of State 
b. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army 
c. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy 
d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force 
e. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com- 
mission 
f. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff 
g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other 
Department or Agency 
i 2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with 
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by 
7 arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA. 
DISTRIBUTION: 


Office of the President 

National Security Council 
National Security Resources Board 
Department of State 

Office of Secretary of Defense 
Department of the Army 
Department of the Navy 
Department of the Air Force 
Joint Chiefs of Staff 

Atomic Energy Commission 
Research and Development Board 


ype 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/ 


15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 
sso 


CURRENT SITUATION IN MALAYA 


SUMMARY 


Primarily, Malaya is of importance to the 
US because it is the world’s greatest producer 
of rubber and tin: In 1948 Malaya produced 
almost half of the total world production of 
natural rubber and more than a third of the 
world production of tin. World War II 
brought forcibly to US attention the impor- 
tance of these vital commodities to a war- 
making machine; they retain their impor- 
tance, if less urgently, in time of peace, and 
are on the lists of strategic materials desig- 
nated for US stockpiling. Through the rub- 
ber and tin industries, Malaya is the sterling 
bloc’s biggest dollar-earner. As such, Ma- 
laya’s economic position materially affects 
that of the UK in the Western Alliance and 
thus affects ERP and other US financial com- 
mitments in Europe. 

Of secondary but considerable importance 
are Singapore’s extensive naval facilities and 


strategic location on world shipping lanes. | 


Control of the Malayan peninsula, and espe- 
cially the island of Singapore, entails control 
of the Straits of Malacca through which 
passes most of the sea-borne commerce be- 
tween the West and the populous nations of 
the Far East. Singapore’s harbor, with its 
repair facilities, is a natural base for naval 
forces, while the airfields on Singapore Island 
offer the best potential facilities in Southeast 
Asia for long-range aircraft. 

Withdrawal of British forces from India 
and Burma gives Singapore even greater im- 
portance as a staging point for British Com- 
monwealth military forces. The naval in- 
stallations in Singapore have been restored, 
and Singapore is the focal point of all British 
armed forces from Ceylon, on the west, to 
Hong Kong, on the east. Unrest in the Far 
East not only has further aggravated the 


problem of area defense there, but also has 
thrown greater responsibility upon Singa- 
pore in the British Empire Defense Plan. 

The UK has thus far been successful in 
maintaining control of Malaya, and Malay 
nationalism has not yet developed to the point 
where it could threaten this control in the 
near future. Certain pressing problems, 
however, are facing the British. The most 
urgent is terrorism, carried on by a predom- 
inantly Communist guerrilla movement num- 
bering 3-5,000 armed members, led and in- 
spired by Chinese whose purpose is the wrest- 
ing of political control from the British. 

To counteract this threat, the British have 
instituted strong political and military action. 
Although terrorist activity has been fairly well 
contained, the threat is still present and 
necessitates large expenditures of money and 
manpower. An additional problem, and one 
which is likely to grow steadily in impor- 
tance, is that of communal friction between 
the Malays; who are favored politically by the 
British, and the Chinese, who, second only 
to the British, dominate the economic life of 
the peninsula. So far, efforts to increase’ 
racial harmony between these two have had 
at best only a superficial effect. 

Although neither tin nor rubber production 
has been seriously affected by terrorist ac- 
tivity, the producers fear the possible effect 
of a decline in world markets. The rubber 
industry (which wholly or partially supports 
a third of Malaya’s population) faces not only 
the likelihood of increased competition from 
neighboring countries’ natural rubber but the 
competition of synthetic rubber. The dan- 
ger is less with respect to tin, but a lessening 
of world demand, with a consequent drop in 
price, is a strong possibility. A decline in 


Note: The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, Navy, and the 


Air Force have concurred in this report. 


as of 31 October 1949. 


It is based on information available to CIA 


suger 1 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


either or both industries, accompanied by 
serious unemployment, would mean an end 
of Malaya’s economic stability and might 
bring political chaos. 

Continued British control of Malaya and, 
consequently, continued US access to Ma- 
laya’s strategic commodities, will largely be 
determined by (1) how Malaya’s 2% million 
Chinese align themselves politically when the 
full effect of China’s Communist victory is 
felt; (2) the extent of moral and material aid 
given Malaya’s terrorists by the Communist 
regime in China; (3) the degree of friction or 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 
2 SEGs 


T 


cooperation between the almost numerically 
equal Malay and Chinese communities; (4) 
the degree of Malay political solidarity and 
willingness to accept continued UK control; 
and (5) the status of Malaya’s rubber and tin 
industries. 

Over the next five years, the net effect of 
these pressures on the UK probably will be 
to threaten British control of the area, and, 
toward the end of this assumed period, will 
mean the granting of greater participation 
in the government to the Chinese in Malaya, 
thus legally recognizing their increasing in- 
fluence. 


yer 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


SE 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


-ET 


CURRENT SITUATION IN MALAYA 


~ THE POLITICAL SITUATION 


1. Background. 


After World War II, the government in Ma- 
laya underwent several changes, finally evolv- 
ing into two distinct entities—the Colony of 
Singapore and the Federation of Malaya. 
The British Military Administration was su- 
perseded on 1 April 1946 by a Malayan Union 
which brought together the nine prewar Ma- 
lay States (four Federated and five Unfeder- 
ated) and the Straits Settlements, excluding 
Singapore which became a separately gov- 
erned Crown Colony. Malay opposition to 
the Union led to its replacement by the pres- 
ent Federation of Malaya on 1 February 1948. 


The Federation differs from the earlier 
Union mainly in that it nominally restores 
sovereignty in the States to the Sultans, 
and makes several other relatively minor 
concessions to Malay sensibilities. As now 
constituted, the Federation of Malaya is a 
protectorate, over which the British exercise 
exclusive control of all internal and external 
affairs, through the mandatory advice of Brit- 
ish advisors in each of the States, except in 
matters pertaining to the Mohammedan re- 
ligion and Malay customs, which remain un- 
der the jurisdiction of the Sultans. The 
framework of the Federal Government in- 
cludes appointed Executive and Legislative 
Councils, with numerical representation in 
these bodies heavily weighted in favor of the 
Malays as against other racial communities. 
Similar Councils appointed by the Sultans 
exist in the various States. 

At the top of the Federation Administration 
is a British High Commissioner in whom are 
vested such extensive powers as unlimited 
veto, unilateral promulgation of Legislation, 
and appointment of members to the Execu- 
tive and Legislative Councils. 


The Crown Colony of Singapore, quite sim- 
ilar in governmental structure to the Federa- 


SEg 


iii 


tion, is administered by a Governor. Six of 
its twenty-two Legislative Council members 
are elected.1 

The major obstacle to efficient operation of 
these two. Governments is the peculiar com- 
position of Malaya’s population, which is a 
constant and increasing threat to British con- 
trol. The 1947 census of both areas indicates 
a total population of 5,818,434, approximately 
half Chinese and half Malay. In the Federa- 
tion itself there are 1,882,874 Chinese and 2,- 
135,811 Malays. In Singapore Colony there 
are 728,523 Chinese and only 73,802 Malays. 
There are, in addition, 534,148 Indians in the 
Federation and 71,300 in Singapore. The 
Chinese, and, to a lesser degree, the Indians, 
object to the favoritism shown the Malays by 
the British administrations in the Federation 
and Singapore. Even the Malays are not en- 
thusiastic over the British rule, but. most of 
them accept it as a temporary expedient 
against domination by the politically and 
economically aggressive Chinese. 


2. Current Problems. 
a. Terrorism. 


(1) Terrorist Organization, Strength, Com- 
position. 

The most pressing current problem in the 
Federation is terrorism which began in May 
1948, instigated and led by the Malayan Com- 
munist Party (MCP). The terrorists, ap- 
proximately 95 percent of whom are Chinese, 
now number between 3,000 and 5,000 accord- 
ing to the best available estimates. Their 
fighting organization, the Malayan Peoples’ 


*Singapore also serves as the headquarters of the 
Commissioner General for the UK in Southeast 
Asia, whose job it is to coordinate policy in Brit- 
ain’s Southeast Asian possessions, which include, in 
addition to Malaya and Singapore, portions of Bor- 


neo, the Crown Colony of Hong Kong, and minor ~ 


islands in the eastern Indian Ocean. 


T 3 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


4 s 


Anti-British Army, evolved from the Malayan 
Peoples’ Anti-Japanese Army, a jungle-wise 
guerrilla force which during World War II was 
largely under the direction of the Malayan 
Communist Party, although partially sup- 
plied and trained clandestinely by the British. 


The terrorists’ organization, which never 
reached a high degree of efficiency, has de- 
teriorated in the past few months, owing to 
vigorous British countermeasures and lack of 
general support from the populace. Direc- 
tion of the terrorists is in the hands of several 
hundred “hard core’ Communists, but there 
seems to be almost no coordination between 
guerrilla bands in various parts of the coun- 
try. Since June 1948 the guerrillas have sus- 
tained in excess of 870 confirmed casualties. 
The terrorists have been forced to withdraw 
to rather inaccessible and sparsely populated 
jungle areas in central and northern Malaya, 
leaving behind only small groups known as 
“killer squads” to continue sporadic and rela- 
tively ineffective attacks against estates and 
mines and civilian personnel.t 


(2) Terrorist Aims, Program, Propaganda. 


the guer- 


rilla program underwent a significant change 
toward the end of 1948. There is reason to 
believe that, in the early stages of violence, 
when the terrorists were enjoying the advan- 
tages of surprise and considerable freedom of 
movement, they hoped to wreck Malaya’s 
economy and wrest political control from the 
British in a matter of months. There are 
also indications that they anticipated moral 
and material aid from other Communist-led 
movements in Asia. However, a reappraisal 
of the situation several months later report- 
edly led the terrorists to change from a short- 


*The terrorists appear to be increasingly short 
of arms and ammunition. British security forces 
(totaling over 100,000) have recovered considerable 
quantities of guerrilla supplies and a program of 
material aid from outside the country has appar- 
ently not materialized. From 1 May 1948 to 30 
June 1949, more than 2,600 rifles, nearly 500,000 
rounds of ammunition, 2,000 shells, nearly 1,700 
hand grenades, more than 1,400 mortars, and nearly 
500 pistols and revolvers were recovered by the 
British. 


ET 


term campaign of sabotage, violence, and 
murder to a long-range strategy of attrition 
both of the country’s economy and the Gov- 
ernment’s authority, through a campaign of 
continued, but less intense military action, 
and greater political work towards gaining 
public support and recruiting new members. 


Terrorist activities seriously affected gen- 
eral morale, and a marked lack of popular 
cooperation with British forces was evidence 
of decreasing faith in British ability to main- 
tain law and order. The Chinese, who suf- 
fered the heaviest casualties, were the most 
noticeably affected. Europeans engaged in 
rubber and tin production, inadequately 
armed and lacking proper protection by Brit- 


ish troops and police, found themselves easy 


targets. However, the full deployment of the 
security forces and the resultant drop in ter- 
rorist incidents has had a salutary effect on 
morale. 


Clandestine MCP newspapers and pamph- 
lets present a steady stream of propaganda, 
the keynote of which is hatred for the British 
soldier and the British Government. Highly 
colored accounts of terrorist exploits and se- 
curity force “atrocities” appear regularly, 
along with bitter denunciation of British im- 
perialism.’ 

(3) Exploitation of Populace. _ ; 

Although much of the terrorist propaganda 
is directed toward the Malays, they have so 
far been unaffected by it. Neither has the 
vast majority of Malaya’s Chinese population 
Shown signs of being swayed to overt action, 


*A booklet, captured in Perak and entitled “The 
Aims of Present Propaganda,” contains a typical 
illustration of the current line: (1) expose the 
violence of Britain’s postwar colonial policy and the 
extreme hardship and suffering it inflicts on the 
Malayan people; (2) represent Britain as being 
forced into a policy of fleecing the Malayan people 
as a result of its weakened domestic and inter- 
national postwar position; (3) accuse British im- 
perialism of robbing the people of their victory in 
World War II and of adopting the Fascist method 
of police and military rule to suppress the people’s 
movement; (4) convince the masses of the invinci- 
bility of the forces ranged against British imperial- 
ism; and (5) recount the Party’s “glorious” history 
of struggle for the independence of the Malayan 
people during the past twenty years. 


super 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


ayer 5 


although many of them are susceptible to 
such propaganda as a result of dissatisfaction 
with their present status or because of sheer 
opportunism. 


In the past, terrorists have been successful 
in extracting “protection money” from Chi- 
nese rubber estate and tin mine owners, but 
recent police measures have probably reduced 
this practice. 


One serious problem which some British 
officials regard as the key to the terrorist sit- 
uation is the more successful exploitation of 
Malaya’s “squatters” by the guerrillas. The 
squatters, who number roughly 500,000, are 
displaced or immigrant Chinese who have set- 
tled illegally on Government holdings, or land 
reserved for the Malays, in scattered groups 
throughout the Federation. It is believed 
that relatively few squatters have voluntarily 
aided the terrorists, but many more have been 
intimidated and blackmailed into contribut- 
ing food, money, information, and shelter to 
marauding bands. Furthermore, the illegal 
squatter communities provide ideal cover for 
the terrorist guerrillas, and threats of vio- 
lence and death prevent many squatters from 
reporting the presence of guerrilla bands to 
the security forces. 


The great majority of Malayan Chinese, 
however, still pursue a noncommittal policy 
toward Malaya’s civil strife. Although some 
of Malaya’s most influential Chinese have 
shown signs of accommodation with the vic- 
torious Communists in China proper, there 
is yet no indication among Malayan Chinese 
in general of a significant swing to the Com- 
munist movement. The fact that they have 
traditionally been aligned politically and 
economically with China nonetheless presages 
increasing difficulties for the British when 
the full effect of the Communist victory in 
China is felt. Already the Kuomintang has 
become - decreasingly effective,, and several 


Chinese newspapers have adopted a strong , 


sympathetic attitude toward the Chinese 
Communists. 


1Rather than face recent restrictions, the KMT 
in both the Colony and the Federation has decided 
to close its branches and to cease (overt) activities. 


(4) Soviet Direction and Support. 


There is no evidence of overt Soviet direc- 
tion of current developments in Malaya or of 
Soviet agents operating in the area. There 
are, however, strong indications that the or- 
der for the terrorists’ uprising emanated 
either from the World Federation of Demo- 
cratic Youth Conference or from the Second 
Congress of the Communist Party of India, 
both of which were held in Calcutta early in 
1948. The militant policy which emerged 
from these conferences is believed to have been 
the basis for the near-simultaneous Commu- 
nist-inspired uprisings in Burma, Indonesia, 
and Malaya. Furthermore, Malaya has re-— 
ceived the attention of the Soviet radio and 
press, which terms Malaya’s insurrection a 
“national liberation struggle of the Malay 
people” and derides British promises for the 
country’s eventual independence in the face 
of what is called the “greedy colonial war.” 


(5) Chinese Communist Direction and Sup- 
port. 

Evidence exists of Chinese Communist in- 
terest in the Malayan situation. On 22 May 
1949 the Peiping radio, in a statement pre- 
pared by two banished Malayan Chinese Com- 
munist labor leaders, protested the British 
hanging of an Indian Communist labor leader 
in Malaya, and characterized the guerrilla 
warfare as a “revolutionary upsurge” and “a 
sign of the solidarity of the revolutionary 
forces of the workers of Chinese nationality 
with the Malayan peasants.” Propaganda 
interest in Malaya, together with promises of 
“moral and material aid wherever possible” 
to colonial areas in Southeast Asia, indicate 
that the Chinese Communists will try to 
counteract the British anti-Communist cam- 
paign. 

There has been no evidence of material sup- 
port from the Chinese Communist Party 
(CCP) since the latter part of 1948. At that 


time, 


Singapore to assist the MCP in the work ot 
reorganization. Another report, possibly: re- 
ferring to the same development, stated that 
the South China Bureau of the CCP planned 
to send sixty reinforcements to the MCP and 


on 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


twenty members of the CCP arrived UsSTAT 


6 SEC 


that some if not all of them left Hong Kong 
for Malaya in September 1948. 


(6) British Political Countermeasures. 

Apart from the military effort against the 
terrorists, the British have rigidly enforced 
numerous and drastic political measures de- 
signed to counteract lawlessness in Malaya 
and to halt the spread of Communism, The 
Communist-infiltrated Pan-Malayan Federa- 
tion of Trade Unions (PMFTU) was pro- 
scribed on 14 June 1948, and on 23 July 1948 
the Malayan Communist Party and its Satel- 
lites, the MPAJA, the New Democratic Youth 
League, and the PETA (a Malaya youth 
group) were banned throughout Malaya. 
The China Democratic League, presumed to 
be a Communist front, has been declared il- 
legal in the Federation, and is operating un- 
der such severe restrictions in the Colony as 
to make its future doubtful. Police emer- 
gency powers, invoked first on 16 June 1948 
in certain parts of the Federation, were legis- 
latively enacted a few weeks later as Emer- 
gency Regulations Ordinances affecting both 
the Federation and the Colony. 

These Emergency Regulations grant wide 
powers to the two governments: banishment 
of individuals, a mandatory death sentence 
for illegal possession of arms, powers of 
search of persons and premises without a 
warrant, long-term detention of suspects 
without trial, close control over movements 
of persons and vehicles, and power to impose 
curfews and occupy properties. Legislation, 
making compulsory the registration of Chi- 
nese over twelve years of age and the carry- 
ing of identity cards, was later enacted. 

From the beginning of the Emergency 
through June 1949, 3,000 aliens and 56 British 
subjects (most, if not all, Chinese and In- 
dians) have been deported under the Emer- 
gency Regulations, and some 7,500 persons 


*Captured documents and interrogation of terror- 
ist prisoners, indicate that Chinese Communists 
from Indochina, Thailand, and Indonesia have in- 
filtrated into Malaya. A captured terrorist leader 
reported that thirty leaders, sent to Indochina for 
training in 1947, returned to Malaya some time in 
1948 and were responsible for increased terrorist 
activities in certain areas of the Federation in De- 
cember of that year. 


SEC 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


i 


have been detained, among them many Chi-. 
nese squatters, suspected or convicted of aid- 
ing the terrorists. In particularly bad areas 
of the Federation, whole groups of squatters 
have been deported, and for security reasons 
some squatter areas have been completely 
evacuated and resettled.’ 


The Emergency Regulations also provide 
that anyone contributing funds to the guer- 
rillas is liable to arrest and prosecution. Al- 
though some property owners have been ar- 
rested, it is believed that the terrorists still 
are able to collect funds through extortion 
sufficient to cover a large part of their operat- 
ing expenses. 


(7) Labor Movement. 


Immediately before the formal outlawing 
of the MCP in July 1948, Malaya’s leading 
labor personalities, who were also Commu- 
nist Party members, reportedly went under- 
ground, taking the Union’s funds with them. 
This action, combined with the earlier ban- 
ning of the PMFTU, which pretended to rep- 
resent most registered labor unions in Malaya, 
left Malayan labor in a seriously demoralized 
state. Immature, lacking in spontaneity of 
unionization and collective action, frustrated 
by racial antagonism and handicapped by the 
peculiarities of Chinese workers’ membership 
in guilds and secret societies, organized labor 
in Malaya has been seriously disorganized 
since that time. While the Government has 
pursued a policy of encouraging workers’ 
groups and has registered 163 individual 
unions, which are attempting to maintain 
some corporate status at the present time, 
emergency conditions are severe obstacles to 
the restoration of trade unionism. The lack 
of money, union distrust of Government 
assistance, as well as unfriendliness in some 
business quarters toward a revival of trade 


*The squatter problem continues to be a costly 
one, and the Government hopes to implement as 
soon as possible the recommendations of a Squatter 
Committee’s report, issued 8 February 1949, which 
suggests that the squatters be settled legally on the 
land they now occupy, and, where that is not pos- 
Sible, resettled permanently on other lands. The 
report stresses the necessity for re-establishing the 
administrative control over squatter areas which 
has been completely lacking in the postwar period. 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


Ss 


unionism, all further hamper Government ef- 
forts to re-establish Malaya’s unions. 

b. Nationalism. 

Nationalism as it is known in neighboring 
Southeast Asian countries is still incipient in 
Malaya and does not now constitute a serious 
threat to British control. The present terror- 
ist disorders, involving, as they do, only a 
small segment of the Chinese population, 
largely under immigrant Chinese leadership, 
cannot properly be considered a manifesta- 
tion of nationalism. The Malays have them- 
selves only recently displayed an appreciable 
degree of political awareness and a desire for 
self-government—a desire rather effectively 
held in check by fear of Malayan Chinese dom- 
ination in the event of independence. 

(1) Political Organization and Activity. 

Of the two major Malay political organiza- 
tions, the United Malay Nationalist Organi- 
zation (UMNO) is by far the larger. Its 
leader, Dato Onn bin Jafaar, is Prime Minis- 
ter of Johore, the largest Malay State, and 
the most influential and respected Malay in 
the country. Relatively conservative in its 
political orientation, the UMNO stands for 
what Dato Onn calls “Malayism,” which 
“aims at achieving and maintaining Malay 
interests.” The organization, until recently 
supported by the Sultans, accepts the premise 
that Malaya will not be ready for self-govern- 
ment for several years. Its most recent move, 
devised to broaden its popular support, was 
to allow associate non-voting membership to 
non-Malays. Dato Onn’s increasing political 
strength and the aims of the UMNO, which 
include the establishment of a single Malayan 
State with one ruler, have aroused considera- 
ble opposition from the Sultans, who are cog- 
nizant of these threats to their sovereignty. 
As a result, some of the Sultans are attempt- 
ing to undermine the influence of both Dato 
Onn and the UMNO, which may lead to the 
polarization of most Malays into either pro- 
Sultan or pro-UMNO factions. Such a split 
in Malay ranks could be extremely embarrass- 
ing to the British administration which would, 
in supporting one faction, alienate a sizable 
group of Malays in the other. 

The Malay Nationalist Party (MNP), a rela- 
tively small left-wing organization, has been 


ry 
‘ 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 
é 


ET q 


more vociferous and reportedly was used, be- 
fore the Emergency, by the MCP in an at- 
tempt to draw Malays into the Communist 
bloc. Whereas the UMNO has adopted a co- 
operative attitude toward the British, the 
MNP is considerably more militant and na- 
tionalistic, and British intelligence indicates 
that only a decision to conserve strength pre- 
vented MNP collaboration with the terrorists. 
While recent intimations from leaders of 
both the UMNO and the MNP indicate that 
a rapprochement achieving greater unity 
among the Malays may be reached some time 
in the future, an effective union of the two 
groups does not appear immediately feasible. 
The only articulate non-Malay political 
organization in Malaya is the left-wing Ma- 
layan Indian Congress, a rather ineffectual 
group that maintains close ties with India. 


(2) Nationalism and Self-government. 

The Federation and Colony Governments 
have encouraged political activity as valuable 
training for the eventual orderly assumption 
of self-government. Commissioner General 
MacDonald stated on 17 January 1949 that the 
purpose of the British administrators in 
Malaya is to “unite and gradually transfer 
rule.” Prime Minister Attlee’s 13 April 1949 
statement that Britain has no intention of 
withdrawing prematurely from Malaya has re- 
assured both European businessmen in the 
Federation and those Malays fearful of the 
Malayan Chinese threat. 

(2) Communal Friction. 

Malay nationalism is closely bound up with 
the increasingly vexing problem of communal 
friction between Chinese and Malays, a prob- 
lem which looms large in any consideration 
of self-government for the country. The 
British policy, which favors indigenous Malays, 
has prevented the Malayan Chinese from 
dominating the country politically as they 
now do economically. The Malays are op- 
posed to any concessions given the Chinese 
which might threaten present Malay political 
supremacy. Malaya’s Chinese, on the other 
hand, are generally dissatisfied with the po- 
litical framework of the Federation, and with 
their lower political status in particular. The 
Malayan Chinese resent the difficulties of ob- 
taining citizenship, the treatment of squatters 


sagt 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


8 SE 


and other hardships resulting from the present 
Emergency Regulations, and their unequal 
representation in the Government. _ 

The British are making some efforts to allay 
this communal friction. A Government-en- 
couraged Malayan Chinese Association (MCA) 
was established on 27 February 1949 to foster 
inter-communal harmony and cooperation. 
So far, its results have been disappointing. 
The Commissioner General also sponsored a 
ten-man Sino-Malay Goodwill Committee, 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


ET 


composed of leading Malays and Chinese, to 
explore the objective of political homogeneity 
and to foster a common Malayan nation- 
ality. The group, now known as the Com- 
munities Liaison Committee, includes repre- 
sentatives of other racial groups and report- 
edly is reviewing the whole field of relations 
between the communities in Malaya—eco- 
nomic, social, and political. Such organiza- 
tions, however, will not be able to provide a 
final solution to racial differences in the fore- 
seeable future. 


SECKET 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


SE 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


ET 


THE ECONOMIC SITUATION 


1. Importance of Malaya’s Products to US 
and UK. 


Although Malaya is a significant exporter 
of coconut products, palm oil and pineapples, 
these are secondary in importance to the two 
major exports, rubber and tin. In 1948, 
rubber constituted over 60 percent of the value 
of total exports from the Federation alone and 
provided the sole or main source of livelihood 
for one-third of the population. Rubber pro- 
duction in the Federation reached an all-time 
record of 696,978 long tons in 1948. The US 
was the leading purchaser with 371,391 tons, 
over half of total US rubber imports. Slightly 
lower production and export levels have been 
maintained so far during 1949. 


Tin-ore production in 1948 rose to 59,753 
tons, approximately 67 percent over the pre- 
vious year although some 50 percent below 
the highest prewar levels. Tin-metal exports 
were 47,214 long tons, of which the US took 
29,497 tons, about a third of total US tin- 
metal imports. Malaya’s tin production in 
1949 is expected to be somewhat higher than 
that of 1948. 


Rubber and tin, currently being stockpiled 
as strategic commodities in the US, represent 
the principal source of Malaya’s income and 
made that country the sterling area’s great- 
est dollar-earner in 1948. US interest in the 
Malayan economic situation, then, is two- 
fold: (1) Malaya is the principal source of two 
important strategic materials; and (2) Ma- 
laya’s earnings strengthen the UK financially. 


2. Current Production and Outlook. 
a. Rubber. 
During the first six months of 1949 over 


300,000 long tons of rubber have been pro- 


1Total exports of rubber from Malaya (which in- 
cluded imports for re-export, mainly from Indo- 
nesia) were 979,172 tons. 


duced in Malaya. The future of the Malayan 
rubber industry, however, is clouded by several 
economic factors. The most publicized of 
these is the competition offered by synthetic 
rubber, although the ultimate results of this 
competition cannot now be conclusively as- 
sessed. An equal threat lies in the fact that 
the greater part of Malaya’s production is 
from large Western-owned estates which pro- 
duce at a high cost as compared with Asiatic 
small-holdings. Over half the production in 
Indonesia, Malaya’s principal competitor, is 
from small-holdings. The industry’s compe- 
titive position is also adversely affected by the 
comparatively advanced age of Malayan plant- 
ings and by the small percentage of high-yield- 
ing rubber trees. These factors cannot be 
overcome except over a period of years and at 
a cost which the present price of rubber makes 
difficult. The Malayan industry has bene- 
fited since the war from the abnormally low 
production in Indonesia and Indochina, a re- 
sult of unstable political conditions. A re- 
turn to normal production in those countries 
will bring a decline in Malaya’s relative po- 
sition in the industry. For these reasons, the 
weakness of the rubber market since the fall 
of 1948 has been a matter of extreme concern 
both to the planters and to Malayan and UK 
authorities as well. 


b. Tin. 


During the first six months of 1949, over 
35,000 long tons of tin ore have been produced 
in Malaya. Factors adversely affecting the 
outlook for Malayan tin production, however, 
are (1) the slow progress made in rehabilitat- 
ing the industry; (2) uncertainty over the fu- 
ture market for tin; and (3) the temporary 
cessation of prospecting and development of 
new tin-producing areas. 


c. Rice. 


A factor of primary importance in all Ma- 
layan labor costs and therefore in Malaya’s 
competitive position in world markets, is the 


¢ 
syfler 9 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


10 Ss 


price of rice.1 Malaya, able to produce only 
approximately one-third of its rice require- 
ments, is dependent upon imports. Malayan 
authorities have taken several steps to stimu- 
late domestic rice production but it is esti- 
mated that maximum production cannot pro- 
vide more than 40 percent of requirements. 


3. Effect of Terrorism. 

According to figures issued by the British, 
terrorism has so far had no appreciable effect 
on current Malayan production. Terrorist 
activities, however, probably have affected fu- 
ture production, and should terrorism con- 
tinue, the long-term outlook is not encour- 
aging. The tin industry has probably suf- 
fered most. Prospecting for new tin deposits 
has been virtually halted because of danger 
to personnel from guerrilla bands and further 
rehabilitation of the industry—repairing of 
dredges, and development of present installa- 
tions—has suffered for the same reason. The 
uncertainty of the European position in Ma- 
laya, particularly when terrorism was at its 
height, made owners of rubber estates and tin 
mines reluctant to invest new capital. The 
danger of terrorists in the relatively unpro- 
tected large rubber estates has resulted in a 
low rate of replanting, which seriously affects 
future production. Government aid in reha- 
bilitating and developing the industries, more- 
over, is necessarily limited by the large Gov- 
ernment expenditures required for the terror- 
ist suppression campaign. 


4. Antagonism toward US Tin and Rubber 
Policies. 

Malaya’s rubber planters are deeply dis- 
turbed by the US synthetic rubber program. 


*At the present time, the Government-controlled 
price for rationed rice is approximately three times 
the prewar price and the price for open-market rice, 
with which all Asiatics must augment their ration, 
is considerably higher. Rice imports, principally 
from Burma and Thailand, are a major source of 
those Governments’ income and the Malayan em- 
ployer who pays a living wage must, in effect, raise 
wages to include the mark-up.that these Govern- 
ments place on their exported rice. The rubber 
industry, whose product is selling below 1940-41 
prices, is particularly. burdened by current rice 
prices and, within the industry, the estate produc- 
ers who employ large labor forces are affected most 
severely. 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


ET 


Planters complain that although the program 
may be partially justified for US security rea- 
sons, it is holding down the price of natural 
rubber to a level where some estates can oper- 
ate only at a deficit. Relaxation of certain 
of the mandatory regulations concerning US 
use of synthetic rubber following the US-UK- 
Canadian financial discussions in September 
1949 was well received. There remains con- 
siderable fear, however, that an increase in the 
use of synthetic rubber in the US, with a sub- 
sequent reduced demand for natural rubber, 
may force many planters out of business and 
create mass unemployment, which in turn 
would threaten British control in Malaya. 

‘Tin producers likewise have grievances 
against US policies. While the price of tin 
has been satisfactory, Malayan producers fear 
that US stockpiles may be unloaded on the 
world market at some future date without re- 
gard for the interests of the industry. They 
dislike the pressure from the US to acquire 
ore for the Texas City smelter, since the ca- 
pacities of the Singapore and Penang smelt- 
ers are far above present Malayan ore output. 
A long-established complementary relation- 
ship exists between Malayan mine owner and 
smelter. 


5. Devaluation. 


Malayan currency was devalued by the same 
amount as sterling on 18 September 1949.1 
The effect on the price of rubber, which is de- 
termined in a free market, was of course a 
rise in terms of sterling and Straits dollars, 
and a fall in terms of US dollars. Undoubt- 
edly devaluation will, at least temporarily, 
benefit Malayan producers. The lower US dol- 
lar prices will improve the competitive position 
of natural rubber relative to synthetic, and the 
higher return in local currency to Malayan 
producers will—again, temporarily at least— 
ease their cost problems. The position of the 
Malayan industry relative to other major pro- 
ducers will be little affected in view of the 
similar devaluation of other soft currencies. 

All Malayan tin has been purchased and 
sold at a fixed price by the British Ministry 


*Prior to devaluation on 18 September 1949, 
$$1.00 equaled £0.2.4 or US $0.4675. Since devalua- 
tion S$1.00 equals US$0.325. 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Relea 


se 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


sygten 1 


of Supply. Following devaluation, the US 
dollar price was lowered from $1.03/Ib. to 
$.95/lb. and the sterling price raised. UK au- 
thorities now plan to reopen the London and 
Singapore metal exchanges and permit tin to 
find a free market price. A further reduction 
in the dollar price is probable which, however, 
should serve to stimulate dwindling demand. 


6. Finances. 


The finances of the Federation are severely 
strained. During the past few months, ur- 
gent representations for financial aid have 
been made to the UK. It is estimated that 
the emergency is costing the Federation 
S$$300,000 a day. Total expenditures of the 
Federation in 1948 were an estimated S$385,- 
182,017 and the resultant deficit estimated at 
over S$113,000,000 was met through borrow- 
ing and drawing on Reserve Funds. The esti- 
mated 1949 deficit (now believed too low be- 


cause of increased Emergency costs) is S$58,- 
717,447. 


The Colony of Singapore, in somewhat bet- 


‘ter financial condition, recently presented the 


Federation with a gift of S$4,000,000 for the 
suppression of lawlessness. Although a S$25,- 
200,000 deficit occurred in 1948 (practically 
all accounted for by a shortfall of S$25,000,000 
in estimated revenue from income tax), the 
anticipated surplus for 1949 is S$$6,500,000. 
According to the Colony’s Financial Secre- 
tary, the present financial position apparently 
gives no cause for concern. 

An £8,000,000 3 percent loan was floated in 
London in May 1949 for Federation financing 
of rehabilitation and development projects. 
The total amount of assistance to Malaya 
from the UK is expected to reach £31,000,000, 
which will be variously used to finance Emer- 
gency costs, pay for war damage compensa- 
tion claims, and contribute toward colonial 
development schemes. 


supher 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


spy 


THE MILITARY SITUATION. ‘ 


1. British Strength and Capabilities; Morale. 


The strength of British Far East Land 
Forces (FARELF) in Malaya totals 39,000. 
Tactical units consist of seven battalions of 
British infantry, seven battalions of Gurkha 
infantry, three battalions of Malay infantry, 
one British artillery regiment, one Malay ar- 
tillery regiment, and one British armored car 
battalion. The various support and adminis- 
trative units are composed mainly of Malays 
with smaller elements of Ceylonese, Chinese, 
and Indians. All arms, equipment, ammuni- 
tion, and part of the rations for this Force are 
supplied from the United Kingdom. 

The Royal Air Force strength in Malaya is 
68 aircraft, of which approximately 50 per- 
cent are directly involved in the suppression 
of the terrorists. The RAF assists in locating 
terrorist units and bases, attacks isolated con- 
centrations independently, strafes terrorist 
hideouts in support of ground forces, and 
transports men and supplies to forward areas. 
Carrier-based aircraft of the Royal Navy have 
participated recently in ground support mis- 
sions. 

In addition to the British military forces 
there are 60,000 to 70,000 police and auxilia- 
_ ries, mostly Malays of varying levels of train- 
ing and usefulness, engaged in terrorist sup- 
pression under British command. The over- 
all capabilities of the police forces have stead- 
ily improved. 

At present, the security forces have the ca- 
pability of protecting mines and plantations 
from serious losses. Recent operations, to- 
gether with the positive measures which the 
British are continuing to take, offer reasons 
to believe that the situation will continue to 
improve. Despite these optimistic signs, mili- 
tary strength in the near future will undoubt- 
edly be maintained at the maximum permit- 
ted by commitments elsewhere. 

The morale of British forces in Malaya has 
improved considerably during recent months, 


1A British Army artillery regiment corresponds to 
a US Army artillery battalion. 


as a direct result of the improved security sit- 
uation. RAF morale is particularly high. 


2. Terrorist Strength and Capabilities; Morale. 

The scattered nature of the Malayan terror- 
ists makes it difficult to develop an accurate 
estimate of their strength. A figure of 3,000- 
5,000, based on an analysis of terrorist attacks 


- over a period of time, is considered the sound- 


est available estimate. Reportedly, terrorist 
forces are well supplied with small arms but 
are chronically short of ammunition. Their 
base of popular support, the Chinese squat- 
ters, is being weakened by British counter- 
measures. 

While the terrorists are able to disturb Ma- 
laya’s economic life by means of murder and 
sabotage, they do not now possess the capa- 
bility either of completely disrupting the econ- 
omy or of driving the British out of the coun- 
try. Recent vigorous measures taken by the 
security forces apparently have weakened the 
terrorists but, while their morale has suffered 
accordingly, there is no evidence to suggest 
that it has collapsed. Indeed, the success of 
the Chinese Communists undoubtedly has en- 
couraged the Malayan Communists, even 
though it has not added to their present phys- 
ical capabilities. 


3. Terrorist Tactics. 


Terrorist tactics are to avoid contact with 
the security forces as much as possible, while 
inflicting maximum damage upon public or- 
der and the economy. The terrorists operate 
in small groups of twenty men or less, and 
typical activities during the past six months 
include: (1) slashing of rubber trees; (2) 
sabotage of electric power lines; (3) sabotage 
of hydraulic intakes to tin mines; (4) burning 
of cover crops on rubber estates, with conse- 
quent damage to trees; (5) ambushing of se- 
curity patrols; (6) raiding in order to obtain 
arms and ammunition; and (7) assassinations. 

The reduction of terrorist activities in re- 
cent months is primarily the result of rein- 
forcement and full deployment of the secu- 


.' 
suger . 13 


* 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


14 Ss 


rity forces, with a consequent interdiction of 
terrorist communications and destruction of 
some terrorist bases of operations. Compelled 
to modify their tactics, the terrorists have be- 
gun to concentrate their attacks on the easier 
targets offered by unguarded estates and 
mines, vehicles on isolated roads, and vulner- 
able railroads and telecommunications. Theft 
of civilian identity cards has facilitated ter- 
rorist infiltration and sabotage. 


4. British Tactics. 


British tactics are centered on intensive pa- 
trolling activities, pursuit of terrorist bands, 
and the destruction of known terrorist con- 
centration areas and bases of supply. The 
RAF assists the security forces in locating ter- 
rorist units and bases and, on occasion, by 
bombing suspected terrorist strong points. 
Units of the Royal Navy patrol both coasts of 
Malaya to prevent arms smuggling. Ele- 
ments of the security forces and special police, 
deployed defensively for the protection of im- 
portant estates and installations, are inade- 
quate to safeguard every target, however, and 
scores of places remain vulnerable to terrorist 
attack. 


5. Foreign Implications. 

a. Thai-British Cooperation. 

The British security forces and the Thai 
Army have been conducting joint operations, 
under British direction, against the Malayan 
terrorists along the border of Thailand, where 
the Thai Army has stationed five infantry bat- 
talions, totaling about 2,500 men. The Brit- 
ish have sold the Thai Army $25,000 worth of 


SE 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 
RET | 


small arms and ammunition exclusively for 
the use of these battalions and, in addition, 
have been training a small group of Thai of- 
ficers in the Jungle Warfare School in Johore. 


Owing largely to Thai inefficiency, however, 
these joint operations have not been effective 
in stopping the escape of terrorists across the 
border, and the British have recently con- 
cluded an agreement with Thailand per- 
mitting British security forces to pursue 
escaping terrorists a distance of forty miles 
inside the territory of Thailand, provided that 
the security detachments are accompanied by 
Thai police. It is believed that this measure 
will improve the capabilities of the security 
forces in dealing with the terrorists. 


bv. Possible Terrorist Infiltration and Smug- 
gling. 

The British have no evidence that the Com- 
munist Chinese terrorists in Malaya have been 
receiving supplies of arms and ammunition 
from outside the country since 16 June 1948. 
While some Chinese have arrived illegally by 
sea since then, it is uncertain whether those 
arriving can be classed accurately as terrorist 
reinforcements. 

An important consideration in assessing fu- 
ture terrorist capabilities is the relative isola- 
tion of Malaya from the present centers of 
Communist armed strength in China and 
northern Indochina. As long as the British 
Navy dominates the Malayan coasts and the 
Thai border is adequately policed, the terror- 
ists will have to depend largely on local re- 
sources and can expect little external support 
either in terms of manpower or material. 


ET 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


te 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


> 
> 


& 


16. “4B 


“\% 


Poe Paice 


. 1 
¥ Ie 
. 


a 


1949 NOV {7 16 45 
14D NOW 7 16 45 


| 7 


8 NOV 17 


Is 


U. 8S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFF 
4393—STATE—1949 


‘ 


Declassified in Part - Sanitized Copy Approved for Release 2013/08/15 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003500050003-5 


a 


