—_— 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


pene 


COPY NO. 


178 


ao hh 7 


COMMUNIST INFLUENCE 
IN BURMA 


ORE 86-49 


This document has meee 1] 


approved for release throu 
the HISYORICAL REVIEW. PROGRAL of 
the Central Intelligence Agency. 
Date 21a] 9% 


pRp O7..4 


CENTRAL 


INTELLIGENCE 


January 1930 nt BR 
RO,CHANGE in\yclass 


DECLASSIFIDQ 
SS. CHANGED MY: 


AGENCY 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


WARNING 


This document contains information affecting the na- 
tional defense of the United States within the meaning 
of the Espionage Act, 50 U.S.C., 31 and 32, as amended. 
Its transmission or the revelation of its contents in any 
manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited by law. 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


Declassified and Approved. For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


SECR 


DISSEMINATION NOTICE 


1, This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient 
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient’s 
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further 
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa- 
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following: 


a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for, 


the Department of State 
. Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Decaeencet of the Army 
. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy - * 


. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force 

. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com- 
mission 

. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff 


g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other 
Department or Agency 


sx Qa a 


h 


2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with 
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by 
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA. 


DISTRIBUTION: 


Office of the President 

National Security Council 
National Security Resources Board 
Department of State : F 
Office of Secretary of Defense 
Department of the Army 
Department of the Navy 
Department of the Air Force 
Joint Chiefs of Staff 

‘Atomic Energy Commission 
Research and Development Board 


__. Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 __.-..__. 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


sufhe T 


COMMUNIST INFLUENCE IN BURMA 


SUMMARY 


Only since the end of World War II has 
Communism become an important factor in 
Burmese politics. For a short period after 
the war Communists. dominated the most 
influential political organization in Burma, 
the Anti-Fascist People’s Freedom League 
(AFPFL). They were outmaneuvered, how- 
ever, by non-Communist elements, split into 
two factions and eliminated from the League 
and the government it sponsored. Neverthe- 
less, the relatively few Communists retain 
considerable popular support, partly because 
of the widespread appeal of Marxism in con- 
temporary Burmese politics, and exert an in- 
fluence far out of proportion to their actual 
numbers. 

Both the Burma Communist Party (BCP) 
and the Communist Party (Burma) (CPB) 
are now in armed rebellion against the Bur- 
mese Government. The Burma Communist 
Party (BCP), by far the larger and more in- 
fluential, has shown increasing conformity to 
the Moscow line, and has of late given indica- 
tions of being influenced by Chinese Com- 
munist policies. Communist elements have 
contributed heavily to the prevailing political 
and economic :instability in Burma. They 
have exploited the instability to extend their 
influence and to seek new allies in an attempt 
to develop a popular front through which to 
achieve their ultimate objective—undisputed 
control of Burma. The BCP is known to have 
maintained liaison with the Communist Party 
of India, and is believed to be in sporadic con- 


. tact with the Chinese Communist Party and 


Communist elements in Indochina. No direct 
contact with the Soviets has been proved. 
The Communist Party (Burma) (CPB) is a 


distinct but weak organization which harasses 
both the government and the BCP. 


Government measures against the Commu- 
nists have not yet been very successful. Al- 
though the government possesses superior 
manpower and material resources, it is not 
likely to be able to suppress the Communist 
insurrections in the near future and pro- 
longed guerrilla warfare is probable. On the 
other hand, the Communists appear incapa- 
ble of overthrowing the government without 
considerable outside assistance. (The estab- 
lishment of a Communist regime in China 
coupled with the possible emergence of a Com- - 
munist regime in Indochina would strongly 
impel the Burmese to accommodate them- 
selves to Communism.) Effective utilization 
of Western assistance by the Burmese Govern- 
ment, which in turn is largely contingent upon 
the settlement of the Karen rebellion, might 
enable it to establish itself as the popular ad- 
vocate of nationalism and improved condi- 
tions in Burma and at the same time identify 
the Communists as proponents of violence 
acting under foreign instruction. Accept- 
ance and use of such assistance would present 
the government with the complex and deli- 
cate problem of convincingly refuting charges . 
of subservience to foreign interests. Further- 
more, the speed at which adverse events are 
taking place in China leaves little time in 
Burma to promote developments favorable to 
the West. 


Although they are largely indirect and de- 
rive from effects of the situation in Burma on 
neighboring areas where the US has more di- 
rect and significant interests, the implications 
of a Communist-dominated or.inclined Burma 
are significant to US security. 


Note: The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, Army, Navy, and the Air 
Force have concurred in this report. It is based on information available to CIA as ° 


seffaxt 1 


of 15 December 1949. 


_....__... Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


* 
SE T 


COMMUNIST INFLUENCE IN BURMA 


1]. Communism in Burma: Present Status and 
Future Prospects. 


Although a relatively small minority ham- 
pered by factionalism and apparently losing 
some support, Burmese Communists remain 
an important force in Burmese politics and 
are making a violent effort to overthrow the 
existing government and establish their own 
administration. While both Communist par- 
ties are effectively advancing the short term 
Soviet objective of creating chaotic conditions, 
the BCP is considerably stronger and more 
advanced in ideological sophistication. The 
BCP has demonstrated its willingness to fol- 
low the international Communist policy and 
to execute instructions from foreign sources. 
It probably will continue to do both, at least 
as long as foreign control is relatively well 
concealed, local control left largely in the 
hands of indigenous Communists, and the ob- 
jectives of Communist policy remain substan- 
tially compatibie with those of extreme na- 
tionalism. Despite its organizational weak- 
nesses and the possibility of increasing inter- 
nal factionalism, the BCP is still capable of 
prolonged violence and of implementing its 
more immediate objectives of promoting un- 
rest in Burma, disrupting its economy, and in 
general undermining the authority of the ex- 
isting regime. Although constituting a con- 
tinuing threat to Burmese stability, it is un- 
likely that the BCP will overthrow the govern- 
ment in the immediate future through its own 
unaided efforts. The probability of the 
emergence of a Communist-dominated regime 
will steadily increase, however, as Communist 
controi of China is consolidated. This will 
become still more likely if, in the meantime, 
the Burmese Government fails to eliminate 
some of its glaring weaknesses, fails to come 
to terms with as many as possible of the vari- 
ous other insurgent groups, particularly the 
Karens, and fails to improve the conditions of 
the Burmese people. 
nists will be in a position to place strong and 


The Chinese Commu-. 


varied pressures upon the Burmese people and 
their government. Their very presence on 
the undefended borders of northern Burma, 
with its implied threat of overwhelming force, 
alone is likely to cause many Burmese to re- 
assess their attitude toward the People’s Re- 
public of China (PRC). The Chinese Com- 
munists could extend matériel and advisory 
and technical assistance to their Burmese 
counterparts which, in time, might enable the 
latter to replace the existing regime. In ad- 
dition, the Chinese Communists will, in all 
probability, attempt to influence the Burmese 
Government by exploiting the pro-PRC tend- 
encies of the Chinese community in Burma 
and of various non-insurrectionary elements 
in Burmese politics, including an important 
faction of the Burma Socialist Party, the ma- 
jority party in the Burmese Parliament. Fi- 
nally, the possible emergence of Communist 
regimes in Indochina or other Southeast 
Asian countries would provide even greater 
impetus toward a Burmese accommodation 
to Communism. 


Although there are indications that the 
Chinese Communists are directly interested 
in the activities of the Burmese Communists 
and occasionally in contact with them, Chi- 
nese Communist agents have apparently de- 
voted the greater part of. their. energies to 
winning the support of the 250-300,000 Chi- 
nese in Burma. In this respect they have en- 
joyed considerable success as most of the Chi- 
nese community is suspected of being at least 
opportunistically or passively sympathetic to 
the Chinesé Communist movement. While 
Chinese Communist agitators and organizers 
are known to be active in Burma, many of 
their activities, both covert and overt, are car- 
ried out by the China Democratic League 
(CDL) which is reputed to maintain amicable 
relations with an influential section of the 
important Burma. Socialist Party. 


From the evidence at hand, it is believed 
that Chinese Communist policy toward 


septs 3 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


4 sypher 


Burma is only in the earliest stages of develop- 
ment. It appears that Chinese Communists 
are attempting to take advantage of the left- 
ist tendencies of various Burmese political 
factions and to curry favor wherever possible 
in the hope of the emergence, perhaps under 
Chinese influence, of a popular front in sup- 
port of a government favorably disposed to- 
wards a Communist China. An immediate 
objective would seem to be consolidation of 
the Chinese population in Burma under firm 
Communist direction with a view to its use 
later as a means of achieving Communist ob- 
jectives in Burma. Another objective seems 
to be the creation of sympathy for the Chi- 
nese movement by attempting to allay Bur- 
mese animosity toward Chinese and fear of 
Chinese domination. The third and final ob- 
jective, naturally, is Communist control of 
Burma. Such objectives may explain the 
Chinese Communists’ avoidance of becom- 
ing directly involved in Burmese affairs and 
their concentration upon the resident Chi- 
nese. At the same time, the Chinese Com- 
munists are free to deal with the Burmese 
Communists, while the “separate and dis- 
tinct” CDL can approach other political ele- 
ments, including those supporting the gov- 
ernment, without alienating potential sup- 
porters on either side. 


Although the Burmese Government has 
taken little action against the Chinese Com- 
-munists in Burma except to arrest a few Chi- 
nese suspected of contacting Burmese Com- 
munists, it is attempting to suppress indig- 
enous Communists by legal and military 
force as well as by advancing a social and 
political program designed to undermine the 
appeal of Communism. However, the lack of 
uniformity and the irresponsibility that mark 
governmental counteractions largely negate 
the effectiveness of such a policy. In addi- 
tion, the government has been severely handi- 
capped by a seemingly endless series of obsta- 
cles, many of which are not of its own making. 
Militarily, the government’s armed forces are 
superior to those of the Communists in terms 
of manpower and matériel, but they have been 
severely handicapped by lack of experience, 


t 


SE 


large-scale desertions, the necessity of having 
to import practically all military supplies, lim- 
ited funds, political interferences, difficult ter- 
rain, and the absence of an efficient transpor- 
tation and communications system. Perhaps 
the most serious weakness derives from the 
necessity to disperse government forces over 
widespread areas in order to fight a variety of 
insurgents in addition to the Communists. 
Despite these serious difficulties, the govern- 
ment has tended to ignore the advice of the 
British Military Mission in Burma. The gov- 
ernment appears capable of containing the 
situation as long as the various rebel groups 
remain divided and mutually antagonistic. 
Nevertheless, widespread disorders, due in 
large measure to Communist activity, are re- 
sulting in a drastic reduction of government 
revenues while at the same time forcing great- 
ly increased non-productive military expendi- 
tures and precluding effective administration. 

Shortly after becoming independent, the 
government enthusiastically launched a far- 
reaching program designed to provide the 
Burmese with political freedom and economic 
security without bloodshed. While such a 
program has probably cushioned the impact 
of Communist propaganda, shortages of re- 
sources, qualified personnel, and much cor- 
ruption have prevented its successful imple- 
mentation, thus providing the Communists 
with propaganda ammunition from another 
direction. 

Recently, the Burmese Government appears 
to have become increasingly aware. of its 
inability to promote peace and prosperity 
through its own efforts. Its policies have 
shifted noticeably from the extreme left to- 
ward a more moderate position. It has shown 
a consequent tendency to seek the support of 
the US and UK, and of nearby Commonwealth 
countries. India and the UK have provided 
Burma with some military supplies, but the 
Burmese rejected a project for joint financial 
assistance by the UK, India, Pakistan, and 
Ceylon on the ground that the conditions were 
too restrictive. The government has also 
sponsored legislation designed to attract, 
rather than discourage, foreign capital for 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


sugher 5 


the development of mineral resources, and 
has shown interest in Point Four of President 
Truman’s inaugural address. The Prime Min- 
ister has recommended negotiation of mutu- 
ally beneficial treaties with nations having 
“common interests,” and the Foreign Minis- 
ter has indicated Burma’s willingness to join 
a non-Communist Pacific bloc, provided China 
and Korea were not included. Socialist reac- 
tion to these changes in policy has been one 
of reluctant acquiescence, and since the So- 
cialists are the government’s chief support- 
ers, they could precipitate a serious political 
crisis at any time. Withdrawal of their sup- 
port could.mean the government’s resigna- 
tion, a split in the Socialist Party, or both. 
Although such developments are entirely pos- 
sible, it seems likely that the parties con- 
cerned realize the disastrous consequences 
that would probably result, and will attempt 
to avoid them at least temporarily. Further- 
more, the government, despite the fact that 
many of its supporters are extreme leftists, 
seems to have recognized that hasty imple- 
mentation of a far-reaching socialist program 
would be impracticable, if not disastrous. 
The new trend in Burmese policies, therefore, 
indicates that Burmese leaders are at last dis- 
covering that Communism is a real threat to 
their security and are turning to the West as 
the only source which can provide the neces- 
sary assistance for economic rehabilitation 
and restoration of internal stability which are 
prerequisite to the security of Burmese politi- 
cal independence. 


Although Communism in Burma will not be 
suppressed in the predictable future, the gov- 
ernment, if it is to restore political stability, 
must intensify considerably its efforts to es- 
tablish itself in the minds of the Burmese as 
the true advocate of nationalism and of better 
conditions in Burma while identifying the 
Communists as the proponents of violence, 
acting under foreign instructions. In addi- 
tion, some kind of negotiated settlement will 
have to be reached with other insurgents and 
greater confidence and assistance obtained 
from the various hill people who heretofore 
have generally been suspicious of the Burmese 
Government in Rangoon. These efforts must 


be undertaken by the Burmese themselves, 
and the prospects for their fulfillment are not 
especially bright. In any event, the govern- 
ment is increasingly dependent upon Western 
support and assistance, and its willingness 
and ability to resist Communism may well be 
proportionate to the encouragement received 
from this source. Efforts to obtain such aid 
without exposing itself to charges of subser- 
vience to foreign interests will be a delicate 
procedure. 


2. Implications to US Security of a Commu- 
nist Burma. 


The implications of a Communist-domi- 
nated or inclined Burma are significant to US 
security. However, such implications are, 
generally speaking, indirect and are best ex- 
pressed in terms of their effect upon areas 
where the US has more direct and significant 
interests. 


A Communist government in Burma would 
obviously curtail severely Western influence 
in still another Far Eastern area. Aside from 
the further loss of Western prestige, Commu- 
nist sway over Burma would further endanger 
India and Pakistan. Moral and matériel sup- 
port could then be more easily extended to 
the Communist movements in those countries, 
especially in Assam and West Bengal where 
the Communist Party of India (CPI) has been 
particularly active, and to East Pakistan 
where the Communists, under the direction 
of the CPI, appear to be making their strong- 
est bid for promoting subversion in the 
Dominion of Pakistan. Furthermore, such a 
development, particularly if coupled with the 
emergence of a pro-Soviet Government in In- 
dochina, would constitute a direct threat to 
the present regimes in Thailand and Malaya. 

Communist activities in Burma have been 
an important contributing factor in prevent- 
ing Burmese rice exports from attaining more 
than approximately one-third their prewar 
levels and in paralyzing other export indus- 
tries.* Decreased Burmese rice exports are 


*The most important being petroleum, timber, 
lead, tin and tungsten, although the production of 
these commodities is relatively insignificant in 
terms of world production. 


sufher 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


directly reflected in the currently low ration 
levels of India, Ceylon, Malaya, and Japan 
and in the high prices those countries must 
pay for imported foodstuffs. .Thus the situa- 
tion in Burma directly affects the stability of 
areas where US political, economic, and stra- 


ail 


tegic interests are clearly apparent. Control 
of Burma could provide the Communists, in 
their struggle for all Asia, with an important 
economic weapon in the form of the pressures 
they could exert in other areas through con- 
trol of Burmese rice BHEBIUSES: 


suger 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


vp 
1 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


APPENDIX 


COMMUNIST INFLUENCE IN BURMA 


1. The Genesis of Communism in Burma. 


Although a few Burmans, mostly university 
students, were inspired by Communist litera- 
ture and participated in sporadic Communis- 
tic activities during the mid-thirties, there 
was no formally organized Communist Party 


until 1944. The development of a cohesive. 


Communist movement began in 1942, when 
Communist-inclined Burmese began organiz- 
ing popular opposition to the Japanese and 
advocated unqualified support of the Allies. 
Because they were instrumental in organizing 
and directing the Burmese resistance to the 
Japanese, the Communists emerged from the 
war well-organized and with their prestige and 
popularity greatly enhanced. 


In August 1944, the Communists were pri- 
marily responsible for the amalgamation of 
various elements of the Resistance into the 
Anti-Fascist People’s Freedom League 
(AFPFL), the dominant political force in 
Burmese politics at the war’s end. Com- 
munists held key positions in the AFPFL, and 
the Burma Communist Party (BCP) consti- 
tuted the League’s largest and best-organized 
component. Although the BCP dominated 
the AFPFL until early 1946, it never achieved 
complete control. The Communists at that 
time made a strenuous effort to gain control of 
the AFPFL by conducting an intense cam- 
paign to strengthen the party and to broaden 
its popular base. Gradually, however, its 
drive for power encountered anti-Communist 
sentiment within the AFPFL, and a non-Com- 
munist group, with considerable adroitness, 
split the BCP and forced the withdrawal from 
the League of both factions. 


The two Communist groups thereupon be- 
came the first effectively organized opposition 
to the AFPFL. The Communist Party 
(Burma) (CPB), popularly called Red Flags, 
was organized in March 1946 and commenced 


a campaign of violence almost from that date. 
Although the Burma Communist Party (BCP) 
(commonly referred to as the White Flags) 
also instigated unrest after withdrawing from 
the AFPFL in November 1946, it temporarily 
avoided overt violence. Rather, it sought a 
rapprochement with the AFPFL and might 
have succeeded had it not insisted upon un- 
conditional acceptance of its terms. 

In February 1948, acting on orders believed 
to have been transmitted by the Soviet Am- 
bassador in New Delhi through the Commu- 
nist Party of India, the BCP radically altered 
its policies and embarked upon a program of 
extreme agitation directed against the AFPFL 
and the government it sponsored. The Com- 
munist press immediately began a campaign 
of. abuse and vilification; BCP leaders openly 
advocated overthrowing the government; a 
series of strikes developed, and there were in- 
dications that the BCP planned to establish 
its own administration over the areas of cen- 
tral Burma which it dominated. On 28 
March 1948, the government finally took ac- 
tion by forcibly breaking the strikes and ar- 
resting as many Communists as possible. All 
important BCP leaders escaped, however, and 
a full-fledged Communist-led insurrection 
soon commenced under their direction. 

The growth of the Burmese Communist 
movement, in a short period, from one of in- 
significance to one capable of seriously chal- 
lenging the constituted national authority, 
may be attributed to a number of causes. The 
general disorganization of Burmese society, 
economic hardship, foreign rule, and the ina- 
bility of Burmans to participate in the de- 
velopment of their country led to the develop- 
ment of intense nationalism, as well as strong 
antipathy towards capitalism. The Commu- 
nists’ initiative in organizing the resistance 
permitted them to capitalize upon the popu- 
larity of Communist leaders after the war and 


sEgwit 1 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


8 sage 


to identify Communism with nationalism. 
During the early postwar period superior or- 
ganization and a well-defined party program, 
with easy promises and simple explanations 
of Burmese grievances, gave the Communists 
a significant initial advantage over other po- 
litical groups. Since their break with the 
AFPFL, the Communists have capitalized 
upon endemic lawlessness and the character- 
istic Burman distrust of governmental au- 
thority by exploiting the numerous weak- 
nesses and shortcomings of the AFPFL and 
the Burmese Government. In some cases, 
they have profited by certain of the govern- 
ment’s anti-Communist measures which have 
injured the innocent as well as the guilty. 
Finally, the outbreak of the Peoples Volun- 
teer Organization (PVO) and Karen * rebel- 
lions have provided the Communists with new 
opportunities to extend their influence by 
seeking new allies to augment their own ef- 
forts for the overthrow of the existing regime. 


2. The Burma Communist Party (White Flags). 

a. Organization. 

The organization of the BCP appears to 
parallel that of other Communist parties 
throughout the world. Supreme authority, 
both . political and military, is vested in a 
three-man Politburo theoretically elected and 
responsible to a Central Committee, which, in 
turn, is accountable to periodic Party Con- 
gresses. No Party Congress has been held 
since February 1948. Below the national 


level, the Communists established Upper and 


Lower Burma commands over District organi- 
zations supervised by District Secretaries- 
General and Central Committees. There is 
evidence that the Communist organization is 
further subdivided into township and village 
groups and that separate units, perhaps on 
the district level of importance, are main- 
tained in Rangoon, and possibly Mandalay. 
BCP organizational problems have un- 
doubtedly been complicated by the necessity 
of operating underground. Effectiveness of 


*For further information regarding the PVO and 
the Karens see ORE 35-49, “The Current Situation 
in Burma.” 


BCP command functions varies from area to 
area and from group to group, and is often 
not too satisfactory. It probably also is ham- 
pered by personal rivalries and the independ- 
ent tendencies of local leaders. Nevertheless, 
the BCP continues to function with reasona- 
ble efficiency and continues capable of main- 
taining pressure on the government and of 
expanding its activities whenever an oppor- 
tunity is: presented. 


b. Leadership. 

The BCP’s leader is its Secretary General, 
Thakin Than Tun. Than Tun emerged as an 
important Communist and in the 1930’s, rose 
to prominence in the resistance movement, 
and was Secretary-General of the AFPFL un- 
til three months before the Communists with- 
drew. Of all the Burmese Communists, Than 
Tun probably best understands Communist 
ideology and its applicability to Burma. Al- 
though not a particularly dynamic leader, 
Than Tun has demonstrated his ability to hew 
to the orthodox party line and has consider- 
able capacity for organization and adminis- 
tration. If recent publications in the Soviet 
press are any indication, his leadership has 
the sanction of the Kremlin, and his party 
is recognized as the “official” Communist 
Party in Burma. , 

With few exceptions, other BCP function- 
aries are young men whose individual capa- 
bilities cannot be accurately assessed. Few 
of these have more than a superficial under- 
standing of Communism, especially of its 
inherent danger to Burmese sovereignty. 
There are indications that although BCP 
unity, discipline, and morale appear to remain 
adequate, they have declined somewhat in re- 
cent months largely as a result of personal 
rivalries which tend to develop factionalism 
in the party, and the inconveniences of having 
to operate underground. Nevertheless, these 
difficulties have not reached disruptive pro- 
portions, and. there are no indications that 
the Communists, by and large, intend to di- 
gress from their present course. 

c. Strength and Distribution. 

Judging from the limited information avail- 
able, actual membership of the BCP probably 
does not exceed a few thousand. The BCP’s 


supfier 
+ 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


a 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


influence, however, is substantially greater 
than its numerical strength would indicate. 


It commands a considerable popular follow-. 


ing (perhaps several hundred thousand) 
throughout a large part of Burma, especially 
in those rural areas of central and southern 
Burma where it has exercised more or less de 
facto control since the end of the war. 
Before going -underground, the BCP at- 
tempted, with considerable success, to gain 
the support of peasants, laborers, and youth 
through its front organizations, the All- 
Burma Peasants Union, the All-Burma Trade 
Union Congress, and the People’s Democratic 


Youth League (also known as the Red Guards, | 


which apparently formed the nucleus of the 
BCP’s military forces). It is from these or- 
ganizations that the Communists probably 
draw the bulk of their present support, and 
one of them, the All-Burma Trade Union Con- 
gress, is still functioning openly in govern- 
ment-controlled areas. 
munists have promoted some unrest and de- 
fections in the military and police forces, have 
exploited the pro-Communist sympathies of 
the PVO, and have infiltrated and influenced 
several important non-Communist political 
and cultural organizations. 


Avowed Communist publications have been 
suspended, but the BCP still produces hand- 
bills and pamphlets which are circulated free- 
ly, even in Rangoon. In addition, some left- 
wing newspapers and a number of ultra-leftist 
authors continue to publish party-line mate- 
rial, although they refrain from severely criti- 
cizing the government. Communist litera- 
ture may also be obtained from a People’s Lit- 
erature House in Rangoon which is known to 
have been established and partially financed 
by the Communist Party of India. 


The BCP has made strenuous efforts to de- 
velop new front organizations in many parts 
of Burma, the most successful thus far being 
the formation of a coalition, known as the 
People’s Democratic Front (PDF), which in- 
cludes an undetermined number of PVO’s and 
army mutineers who had been conducting 
their own more or less independent rebellions. 
This organization is potentially an extremely 
serious threat to the restoration of stability 


In addition, the Com- 


in Burma under a non-Communist regime. 
While the BCP controls only relatively small 
and scattered areas throughout southern Bur- 
ma, the PDF dominates considerable territory 
along the Irrawaddy River valley and has a 
fairly large and well-armed military force at 
its disposal. The PDF, however, appears to 
suffer from a faulty command structure, there 
is evidence of friction among its components, 
and its lasting qualities remain to be demon- 
strated. Nevertheless, the PDF is the “popu- 
lar front” type of organization without which 
it is highly unlikely that the BCP could 
achieve domination of Burma. 


d. Military Activities. 

BCP military activities are conducted pri- 
marily by small guerrilla bands in widely sep- 
arated areas. These bands are well supplied 
with Japanese, British, and US small arms. 
While the Communists have captured numer- 
ous poorly defended towns and villages, they 
have been unable to hold a given position 
against determined government attack and 
have avoided engaging in pitched battles 
wherever possible. Although numerically 
and materially weaker than the government 
forces, the Communists enjoy such advan- | 
tages as favorable terrain, extreme maneuv- 
erability, and a capacity to lose their identity 
among local populations. Furthermore, they 
are opposed by limited and inexperienced gov- 
ernment forces which must cope with other 
insurgents and are incapable of giving ade- 
quate and continuing protection except in 
selected centers of population. Consequently, 
the BCP has not been suppressed, nor ‘is it 
likely to be in the predictable future. 

The ultimate objective of the BCP’s mili- 
tary campaign is to wrest political power from 
any existing non-Communist regime. Until 
the BCP can develop a force capable of mak- 
ing a successful frontal assault upon the gov- 
ernment, however, it must continue to confine 
itself to guerrilla tactics as the best means of 
undermining the government’s authority and 
aggravating national instability. 

Military relations between the BCP and 
other insurgent groups are obscure, largely 
because of the difficulty often encountered in 
identifying the participants in any given en- 


SEgpeT 


a 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


10 spp 


gagement. There are strong indications that 
on several occasions, because of the general 
Burman antipathy towards the Karens, the 
BCP has cooperated with government and 
PVO forces against the Karens. In other 
cases, the Communists are reported to have 
avoided fighting the Karens, or even to have 
entered into tactical cooperation in local op- 
erations against the government. Despite 
government allegations, there is very little 
evidence of premeditated or widespread coop- 
eration between the BCP and the Karens. In 
fact, the Karens have been most emphatic in 
their condemnation of Communism. There 
have been clashes between BCP and CPB, and 
it is believed that the mutual animosity of the 
two Communist groups is bitter and deep- 
seated. Despite the formation of the PDF 
and Communist efforts to avoid antagonizing 
the PVO, there have also been conflicts be- 
tween the two and there are indications of 
friction within the framework of the PDF over 
the matters of spheres of influence and local 
leadership. 


e. Plans and Policies. 

BCP policies, originally based almost en- 
tirely on nationalism and virtually identical 
to those of the AFPFL, have latterly tended to 
conform increasingly to the Moscow line. 
Nevertheless, the primary source of friction 
between the BCP and the Socialist-dominated 
AFPFL may be traced to AFPFL efforts to at- 
tain national independence and implement a 
socialist program without resorting to vio- 
lence, rather than to any profound ideological 
differences. For example, the Anglo-Burmese 
Treaty, which includes important concessions 
to the UK in return for independence, has be- 
come the chief target of BCP propaganda at- 
tacks upon the Burmese Government. For 
obligating Burma to honor foreign debts, to 
pay compensation for nationalized foreign 
property, and to accept a British Military Mis- 
sion, the BCP accuses the AFPFL’s “right 
wing” of accepting sham independence. 
Steadily deteriorating conditions in Burma 
have forced the government to seek relief by 
modifying its extreme socialist policies and 
seeking closer relations with the West, thus 


providing the BCP with new. propaganda ma- 
terial. 

The most recent expression of BCP policies 
appears in the March 1949 manifesto an- 
nouncing the formation of the PDF, which, 
although signed by representatives of all par- 
ticipating elements, undoubtedly was written 
by the Communists. It presents a compre- 
hensive politico-economic program which gen- 
erally conforms to the international “party 
line” and in many respects is strikingly sim- 
ilar to the policies of the Chinese Communist 
Party, particularly those propounded during 
the earlier days of the Chinese revolution. 
According to the manifesto, the first objective 
is development of the PDF into an effective 
political and military organization. 

The primary goals of the PDF are the 
overthrow of the present government and the 
establishment of a People’s Democratic Re- 
publican State based upon a new “People’s 
Democratic” constitution. Under the new 
administration, peasants and workers are 
promised extensive privileges; freedom of 
speech, assembly, writing, and religion are 
guaranteed—so long as they are not used as 
political instruments—and a “broad” pro- 
gram of nationalization and industrialization 
is envisaged without the aid of ‘“Anglo-Ameri- 
can expansionists.” 

The new government intends to repudiate 
all foreign debts, abrogate the Anglo-Burmese 
Treaty and any others “signed against the in- 
terest of the nation,” and wage a continuous 
struggle against Anglo-American “expansion- 
ism.” It will not accept assistance that would 
affect adversely Burma’s political, economic or 
military interests (according to its own inter- 
pretation of Burma’s interests) but would be 
willing to establish friendly relations with any 


-country on a “reciprocal and equal” basis. 


It. will negotiate freely with other “People’s 
Democratic” states in the interest of ‘world 
peace.” 

Of interest also is the BCP’s attitude 
towards the more conservative and backward 
ethnic minorities, particularly the Karens. 
The PDF manifesto states that, although the 
feudal systems of the hill people must be re- 
placed with a “‘people’s” administration, these 


a - 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


wy 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-R 


suet 11 


people are entitled to equal rights with all 
other peoples in Burma, including those of 
autonomy and secession. The Karen rebel- 
lion is attributed to imperialist machinations, 
and the PDF is charged with “smashing” the 
Karen rebellion while the Karen “masses” are 
called upon to repudiate their leaders and 
join the Burman “masses” in order to shape 
their own destiny along “democratic” princi- 
ples. 

While BCP intentions are clear, the realiza- 
tion of their ambitions has not progressed be- 
yond the earliest stages. The conference at 
which the PDF was founded was marked by 
a considerable disagreement. The PVO sub- 
sequently is reported to have held a meeting 
of its own to develop a unified policy and pre- 
vent further fragmentation. Furthermore, 
there are indications of growing suspicion of 


_the Communists within the PDF as well as 


the development of personal jealousies. Nev- 
ertheless, the BCP has succeeded, temporarily 
at least, in forming a popular front dominated 
by Than Tun and now may make efforts grad- 
ually to incorporate those revolutionaries still 
operating independently. As a result, al- 
though internal dissensions appear to have 
prevented the BCP from fully exploiting its 
gains, Communist capabilities in Burma were 
appreciably enhanced. 


f. Foreign Contacts. 

The BCP is known to have maintained fair- 
ly extensive liaison with the Communist Party 
of India and is suspected of having sporadic 
contact with the Chinese Communist Party 
and Communist elements in Indochina. No 
direct contact with Soviet agents or the USSR 
has been proved, and, if such contacts exist, 
they are indirect. 

The extent of foreign control over the BCP 
is still an unresolved question. Strong for- 
eign influence (Chinese and Soviet) is discern- 
ible in its propaganda which reflects growing 


.compliance with Soviet policy. Although 


Than Tun has denied the charge of foreign 
dictation, he has publicly stated that (a) the 
Communist uprising in Burma is allied with 
similar movements elsewhere in the world 


which recognize the leadership of Soviet Rus- 
sia, and (b) that there were many Indians and 
Chinese in the BCP, some of whom had been 
“elected” leaders by the masses. The BCP 
therefore has demonstrated its amenability to 
foreign : “advice,” at least on policy and it 
would doubtless accept material assistance 


with alacrity. However, it is entirely proba- 


ble that direct foreign intervention such as 
usurping authority in the implementation of 
Soviet or Chinese Communist policy, or occu- 
pation would alienate large numbers of local 
adherents to the Communist movement in 
Burma. 


3. Communist Party (Burma) (Red Flag). 


The CPB appears to have degenerated from 
a fairly strong organization into numerous 
uncoordinated anarchist and bandit gangs 
operating without principles or clearcut ob- 
jectives. (This loss of cohesiveness may be 
due largely to the long incarceration of its 
leader, Thakin Soe, but may be rectified 
somewhat now that he is reported to be once 
again at large.) In terms of members, popu- 
lar support, and insurrectionary potential the 
CPB is considerably weaker than the BCP. 
Although the CPB has been responsible for 
some disturbances in central and- southern 
Burma, it has been most active in Arakan, 
which forms the western coastal area of Bur- 
ma. However, even in Arakan, it is question- 
able how much of the unrest is attributable 
to the CPB, and how much to Arakanese sep- 
aratists. The CPB’s policies, if any actually 
exist, are at best vague generalizations along 
the lines of theoretical Marxism. Militarily, 
the CPB violently opposes the government, 
the PVO, and the BCP, the latter being consid- 
ered opportunistic and compromising. Al- 
though the CPB advocates cooperating with 
the Karens, it appears to have had little if any 
success. So far as is known the CPB does 
not maintain any foreign contacts. All 
things considered, the CPB remains a danger- 
ous organization, capable of prolonging the 
general unrest in Burma, but not of unseating 
the government through its own unaided 
efforts. 


> an 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 .._ 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


Doctunen TL 


3 : NG CHANGE ws : 
x DECLASSIFIEN 


Qiscs. CIANGE YA 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : 


7 > 


Declassified and Approved For Release 2013/05/20 : 


CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


GPO—State Serv.—50—4552 


CIA-RDP78-01617A003700140001-5 


cael 


