                            Digital Archive                            digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org
                            International History Declassified




                                  July 06, 1949
                             Report, Kovalev to Stalin

Citation:
“Report, Kovalev to Stalin,” July 06, 1949, History and Public Policy Program Digital Archive, APRF:
F. 3, Op. 65, D. 363, Ll. 20-23. Reprinted in Andrei Ledovskii, Raisa Mirovitskaia and Vladimir
Miasnikov, Sovetsko-Kitaiskie Otnosheniia, Vol. 5, Book 2, 1946-February 1950 (Moscow: Pamiatniki
Istoricheskoi Mysli, 2005), pp. 163-164. Translated for CWIHP by Sergey Radchenko.
http://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/113382



Summary:
Kovalev relays several requests made by Liu Shaoqi, Gao Gang, and Wang Jiaxiang. The requests
include advice on running a communist government, that Soviet professors be sent to China, advice
on how to manage Manchuria, and if China could receive a Czechoslovak trade delegation.



Original Language:
Russian



Contents:
      English Translation
To Comrade I.V. Stalin.

Reporting:

In conversations with me on 5 and 6 July Cdes. Liu Shaoqi, Gao Gang, and
Wang Jiaxiang requested to report to you the following:

1. They want to receive from you instructions and advice on the questions,
recounted in the report of c. Liu Shaoqi, provided to you.

2. They would like to familiarize themselves, while in Moscow:

a. With the structure of the VKP(b) and the work of the party organs;

b. With the structure of the Soviet state;

c. With the planning organs, the planning of people's economy and managing
the economy of
the country;

d. With the situation with enlightenment and cultural work in the country;

e. With the structure and work of mass organizations (professional unions,
volunteer societies etc.) f. To conduct excursions to plants, factories, kolkhozes,
sovkhozes, institutions;

3. They ask to send to China Soviet professors of different branches of
knowledge (including a professor of Marxism-Leninism) for teaching work in the
Chinese higher educational institutions and, for their part, would like:

a. To send to the USSR a group of senior managers (heads of the directories,
directors of plants) for 1.5—2 months for studying specific branches of the
industry;

b. To organize in the Soviet Union a special educational institution for the
Chinese, in which three categories of people could simultaneously study, to the
total amount of 1,000 people. 1st category—leading cadres, engineers and
technicians with a one year course of study, 2nd category—middle management
ranks with a two year course of study, and the 3rd category is the youth with a 5
year course of study. This educational institution could prepare specialists—
managers of industry, trade, finance, jurists etc.

4. The delegation expressed a wish to resolve some questions concerning
Manchuria:
a. About the provision of heavy machine for
machine building plants, not on credit, but as reciprocal exchange, goods for
goods;

b. They would like to clarify the prospects of trade between the USSR and
Manchuria, the names of goods, prices, means of goods exchange and the
timing;

c. They would like to receive for Manchuria no less than 300 specialists for
various branches of industry, especially for replacing the Japanese, who work in
the metallurgical, military, aviation industries, as well as at the power plants and
as doctors in the hospitals.

They also raised the question of Port Arthur, declaring that they wish that the
Soviet forces stay there not for 30 years, as the treaty stipulates, but even 60
years, but they would like to change somewhat the existing situation in the
mutual relations of Manchuria and Dairen:

1. To obtain free access to the port for taking out coal and salt and for receiving
freight destined for Manchuria;

2. To establish one currency note for all of the Manchurian territory, without
which they cannot support the activity of enterprises, which formerly worked
solely for the war [effort], located in Dairen. [They] have to close them down,
which causes unemployment and discontent of the workers. They would like to
conduct this undertaking with regard to the currency note in September 1949.

5. They also turned [to us] with a request as to whether they can use 50% of the
power of the power plant on the Yalujiang (its total power, in their words, is 400
thousand kilowatts). They reminded that at the time of the construction of this
power plant China invested 75 million yen, and Korea 50 million yen. Their
efforts to reach an agreement with Korea independently were not crowned with
success. The Koreans set aside for them only 20 thousand kilowatts.

6. They are asking whether they can receive a
Czechoslovak trade delegation, which the Czechoslovak government is asking
them to receive. The delegation is composed of 5 people: 2 representatives of
the Skoda plant, 2 from the Batia concern
and one textile-man.

7. The delegation requested to convey Cde. Mao Zedong's request to you to
inform the delegation regarding questions touching upon the international
situation and, in particular, is war possible, and when is it possible?

8. The delegation received a telegram from Cde. Mao Zedong, in which he
agrees to the creation of a commission to work out an agreement on supply of
goods on credit. But in view of the fact that the financialeconomic apparatus has
not been created yet, and also the specialists, data and estimates of needed
equipment are lacking, [he] requested to make the list of orders for equipment
on the spot after the arrival in China of Soviet specialists and their study of the
situation in industry. In his telegram he pointed out that the credit (50%) will be
mainly utilized in Manchuria, then in northern China, and then in the northwest
for the restoration of the metallurgical, coal industry, power plants, railroads, and
for the organization of extraction and processing of oil. The delegation also
expressed the opinion that it is empowered to sign the credit agreement without
further consultation with the CCP CC.

Kovalev.


 Excerpt from Kovalev Transcript for Stalin re Kovalev's Conversation with Liu Shaoqi and Gao Gang on Intelligence
 and Counterintelligence Work, July 7, 1949

 Comrades Gao Gang and Liu Shaoqi . . . stressed that they would like to have closer contact in the work of the
 Soviet and Chinese [intelligence] organs and [to have] a unified program of action against the imperialists and
 reactionaries . . .
 They emphasized that many people who had been recommended by the CCP for work in the Soviet information
 bodies, as well as those who were recruited by the Soviet bodies independently, had been cut off from the Party's
 supervision, had been corrupted, and in some cases had been recruited by American and Kuomintang intelligence.
 Because of that, we have to undertake a joint effort to purge such persons . . . Comrade Gao Gang offered the
 example of Manchuria, where 300 radio transmitters had been uncovered and confiscated by Chinese intelligence,
 among which 40 were formally supposed to be soviet but were in fact working for the interests of the Kuomintang
 and the United States. that was made possible by the lack of sufficient contact between the Chinese and Soviet
 information and intelligence organs.
