                            Digital Archive                            digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org
                            International History Declassified




                 February 05, 1949
 Memorandum of Conversation between Anastas Mikoyan
                 and Mao Zedong

Citation:
“Memorandum of Conversation between Anastas Mikoyan and Mao Zedong,” February 05, 1949,
History and Public Policy Program Digital Archive, APRF: F. 39, Op. 1, D. 39, Ll. 74-77. Reprinted in
Andrei Ledovskii, Raisa Mirovitskaia and Vladimir Miasnikov, Sovetsko-Kitaiskie Otnosheniia, Vol. 5,
Book 2, 1946-February 1950 (Moscow: Pamiatniki Istoricheskoi Mysli, 2005), pp. 78-80. Translated by
Sergey Radchenko.
http://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/113323



Summary:
Anastas Mikoyan and Mao Zedong discuss the situation within the CCP, the workers' question, the
military situation an the CCP's tasks, and Rittenberg and Ma Haide. (Evening)



Original Language:
Russian



Contents:
      English Translation
On the evening of 5 February 1949 another meeting with Mao Zedong took place in the presence
of CCP CC Politburo members Zhou Enlai, Liu Shaoqi, Ren Bishi and Zhu De, and the interpreter
Shi Zhe, c[omrade]s I[van]. V. Kovalev and E.F. Kovalev

ON THE SITUATION WITHIN THE PARTY

Mao Zedong continued the conversation begun earlier that day about the situation within the party.
He stressed once again that during the period of in-party struggle with the leftists and rightist
opportunists in the Soviet areas up to 9/10 of the territory and members of the com[munist] party
were lost.

In the course of 1941-1945, the consciousness of the members of the party rose substantially and
this prepared the ground for calling the united 7th Congress of the CCP in 1945. The political
program, adopted by the Congress, is currently being implemented and on its basis the
organizational, political and ideological unity of the CCP was reached. It is true, Mao Zedong said,
one can still observe in the ranks of the party a lack of discipline and elements of anarchy, but
these are merely rare instances, on the whole there are no competing opinions and groupings in
the party. Thereby we prepared ourselves to come out onto the modern political arena as a unified
party. Otherwise it would be difficult for us to work. The intelligentsia does not compete with us.
The Guomindang is still competing with us but its weight ratio in politics is becoming smaller and
smaller.

THE WORKERS' QUESTION

Using a pause I conveyed the content of the telegram from comrade Filippov on the workers'
question. I said that one should not prohibit strikes, otherwise the CCP may lose the trust of
workers. The significance of the working class in the revolution is determined not by its quantity, I
said, but by the fact that it is a new class, the carrier of the most progressive ideas. The future
belongs to the working class. Its significance in the society will grow unstoppably.

The question that one should not prohibit strikes caused a noticeable bewilderment on the part of
Mao Zedong and the present members of the CCP CC Politburo. On the whole telegrams with
recommendations on the work among workers, youth, women and on the preparation of the
Chinese cadres, the content of which was conveyed by me to Mao Zedong and the Politburo
members, made a good impression. When they were related, Mao Zedong and the members of the
Politburo uniformly nodded in agreement, and Mao Zedong said that the suggestions will be carried
out.

THE MILITARY SITUATION AND THE CCP'S TASKS

Then Mao Zedong turned to recounting the military situation and the tasks of the CCP. He
separated the military situation into two stages.

1. The Civil War at the present time
2. Defense measures after the Civil War.

Speaking of the civil war at the present time, Mao Zedong said that the most terrible time has been
left behind, the period of large operations may be considered finished. Now purely military
operations are gradually being replaced by the peace offensive on large Guomindang centers. As
an example he cited the peaceful resolution of the advance on Beiping, where Fu Zuoyi's forces
were under offer to surrender. He said that we will not conduct large operations near Nanjing,
Hankou, Shanghai and Canton. However, Mao Zedong said, this does not mean that we are not
conducting any preparations at all for further offensive operations. We are facing great difficulties
on this road, mainly of the financial character. Military expenses unfavorably reflect on the prices
and lead to inflation. One should take into account that we never had such a huge army and never
conducted such large operations as now. Of course this leads to great expenses, which reflect on
the economy of the liberated areas. Nevertheless, all efforts must be directed at destroying the
enemy, and then taking up the economy. As a result of this policy our People's Liberation Army
since October 1948 to January 1949 destroyed 1 million 300 thousand of the elite Guomindang
forces. Formally we have not yet won because we only have a half of China, but in fact the war is
winding down.

After the end of the Civil War the main task of the party will amount to economic construction. In
order to finally destroy the enemy, one should grow strong economically. Therefore, already now
one should make relevant amendments to our plans, cut back expenses, strengthen the financial
situation. We must finish the war with the least possible sacrifices, but it does not mean that we
must not act. Our army must continue its offensive, take cities and be prepared for various
contingencies. But one should also not forget that simultaneously with the military activities one
should now prepare the cadres of political and economic workers, explain our political
undertakings, be prepared for the resolution of the workers' question, market relations, prepare
ourselves for work in the countryside in the new conditions. We say that our army must not only
fight but prepare itself for peaceful work.

Continuing to recount the military undertakings, Mao Zedong said that in the nearest 2-3 months
one should prepare oneself in such a way so as to confidently move to southern China and take its
wide and economically valuable regions. 1-2 years will be required for us to be capable to fully
possess China politically and economically. Military operations must go on from Beiping [Beijing] to
Canton.

In the future the focus of our work will move into the cities. In the course of the last 20 years we
had little experience of work among the city population. In the recent times, when our army began
to take large cities, the city question rose before us to its full height. The Red Army played a large
role in the fact that now we have big industrial cities. Thank the Red Army for it regaining for us
Harbin and other cities of Manchuria. The Soviet Army not only helped us to regain cities but
helped us in their reconstruction. Now we must develop Changchun, Benxihu, Anshan, Kalgan,
Chifu, Beiping, Tianjin and other cities. In the nearest future the same task will emerge with regard
to Xi'an, Shanghai and Hankou. Possibly, our forces this winter will capture Canton and Guilin.

ON RITTENBERG AND MA HAIDE

Making use of a pause I recounted the content of the telegram regarding [US interpreter Sidney]
Rittenberg. The telegram made a great impression on Mao Zedong and the members of the
Politburo. [CCP CC Politburo Member] Ren Bishi who took part in the conversation stated that
Rittenberg was recommended and left here by the journalist [Anna Louise] Strong. Mao Zedong
informed [me] that since 1936 another American has been living with them by the name of Ma
Haide [George Hatem], who had joined the Chinese Com[munist] Party. Ren Bishi added that Ma
Haide was recommended and left here by the journalist [Edgar] Snow.

I remarked to Mao Zedong, wasn't it clear that this American as well is a resident of the American
intelligence and he should be arrested[?]. The information on Rittenberg caused surprised
exclamations—“Yes! Yes!”

In conclusion of the conversation Mao Zedong asked me to give information about the situation in
the Sov[iet] Union and on the international situation. I satisfied his request. Information was heard
with great attention on the part of Mao Zedong and the CCP CC Politburo members.

The conversation ended at this.
