                              Digital Archive                           digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org
                              International History Declassified




                                 December 30, 1948
                             Cable, Mao Zedong to Stalin

Citation:
“Cable, Mao Zedong to Stalin,” December 30, 1948, History and Public Policy Program Digital
Archive, APRF: F. 39, Op. 1, D. 31, Ll. 49-52. Reprinted in Andrei Ledovskii, Raisa Mirovitskaia and
Vladimir Miasnikov, Sovetsko-Kitaiskie Otnosheniia, Vol. 5, Book 1, 1946-February 1950 (Moscow:
Pamiatniki Istoricheskoi Mysli, 2005), pp. 495-497. Translated for CWIHP by Sergey Radchenko.
http://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/113789



Summary:
Mao details to Stalin the recent military operations the Communists have undertaken against the
Guomindang army. The first is in the area of Suizhou, Huaiying, and the Huaihe River. The second is
in Du Yuming. Mao states that once these operations are complete, he will depart for Moscow. Mao
discusses future tactics against the Guomindang.



Original Language:
Russian



Contents:
       English Translation
Comrade Stalin!

1. Received your telegram dated 28 [sic] November.

Will act in accordance with this telegram. When the currently ongoing two large
military operations are finished, then I will go to Moscow.

2. The successes of the military operations near Suizhou are considerably
greater than we expected them to be in the first place. At the present time we
finished off 35 full divisions of the Guomindang army, including 4 divisions
[which] started a rebellion and took our side. 19 divisions of the Guomindang
remain, under the command of [GMD General] Du Yuming, which are encircled
by us in the area to the southwest of Suizhou and do not have an opportunity to
escape. About 2 weeks will be needed to finish them off entirely.

Army groups of the GMD forces, heading for the rescue in the direction of
northwest from Bangbu, have already been thrown back by our forces and
retreated in the region to the south of the Yangzi River. The remnants of the
enemy in the area of Bangbu are preparing to flee.

Suizhou, Huaiying, as well as all cities and villages to the north of the Huaihe
River are fully in the hands of our army.

The forces of Du Yuming, which number more than 100,000 people, are
occupying a territory not greater than 10 square kilometers. They are encircled
on all sides by our forces.

In this military operation we concentrated two groups of field forces of [CCP
military commanders] Chen Yi and Liu Bocheng numbering 600,000 people, and
forces from the servicing population at the forward fronts numbering 600,000
people, in all about 1,200,000 people. This is the biggest operation of all
operations conducted previously on the southern front.

The units of the enemy, which are already defeated, and [those] in the process
of being defeated, are strong and elite forces of the Guomindang. After [our]
victory in this operation, Jiang Jieshi will no longer have first rate forces.

3. In order that the 48 divisions of Fu Zuoyi's group do not escape from the line
of Beipinglu-Pingsuilu, we, without waiting for [troops to] finish resting and
[before] bringing in order the Manchurian units, ordered them [the troops] to
undertake an offensive against the south beforehand and cooperate with our
forces in northern China in encircling and destroying the forces of Fu Zuoyi.

By the present time 15 divisions of Fu Zuoyi have been destroyed by us. [We]
have returned: Shanhaiguan, Tangshan, Kalgan and other wide areas, encircled
the main forces of Fu Zuoyi (33 divisions) in Beiping [Beijing], Tianjin and
Tanggu (a sea port). Another month will be needed, then one can finish them
off.

In this military operation we are using about 900,000 troops, and about 400,000
people of the forces of the servicing population at the forward fronts. This
operation is one of the largest operations, ever conducted on the northern front.

In the last military operation, conducted in Manchuria in September-October, we
used the forces of the servicing population numbering a total of 900,000 people.

4. At the present time the situation is developing considerably faster than it was
predicted by us at a meeting of the CC at the beginning of the month of
September. Now it is already no longer what was assumed before—mainly to
overthrow the power of the Guomindang within 5 years (beginning from July
1946), but now one can for the most part overthrow the power of the
Guomindang in the course of three and a half years. However, we still follow the
measure of confident actions [sic].

After the end of the military operations near Suizhou, Beiping [Beijing] and
Tianjin the main body of our forces must take a rest and be brought into order in
the course of three months, and [must] capture an isolated city of Taiyuan, and
then [they] will move into the basin of the Yangzi River and into the wide
southern regions.

5. We recruited and are preparing 53,000 cadres for using them to work in new
regions which will be captured next year. This preparation is being carried out in
a planned manner, there is confidence in carrying out work of preparing the
cadres.

6. Intensified [ideological] education work is being carried out among the party
cadres to grasp the theory of Marx-Engels-Lenin-Stalin and a series of concrete
political measures of the Chinese Revolution. The faster the Chinese Revolution
is developing, the more we feel the extreme importance of this education work
[among] the cadres.

7. The rule of the Guomindang is difficult to sustain. Degradation and division
are occuring internally. The wide masses of the country more and more strive
towards us. The liberal bourgeoisie are wobbling more and more, searching with
us for a solution for themselves. The number of people following the
Guomindang is shrinking from day to day.

8. In recent months we took a number of big cities. At the same time there was
a very good order there. Our various political undertakings received approval on
the part of the wide masses. This had a very good influence in the areas of the
Guomindang rule.

9. The discipline of the People's Liberation Army has increased considerably,
the military spirit has gone up, the commanders have greater confidence in the
matter of taking power in the country. The discipline of the Guomindang is
unruly. The number of defectors from the Guomindang forces is growing larger
and larger.

After [we] finish the two military operations near Suizhou and Beiping [Beijing]
the Guomindang will no longer possess cadre-strength forces. The number of
forces will be decreased to 170 divisions. The majority of these—newly formed
or with low battle capability.

10. Leading figures of the democratic parties and groups and people's
organizations of Hong Kong, Shanghai, Beiping [Beijing], Tianjian and other
large cities have come or will soon come to our areas under the banner of the
political consultative meeting and the democratic coalition government. The
majority of these people were invited by us to participate in the political
consultative meeting.

11. The blatantly aggressive policy of the US government has already
bankrupted itself. Now the Americans intend to move from active support of the
Guomindang to the support of the local Guomindang and southern Chinese
militarists, so as to resist the People's Liberation Army with their military forces.
This is [the case] on the one hand, and on the other—to organize and send their
lackeys so that they infiltrate the political consultative meeting and the
democratic coalition government and could create an opposition bloc there and
undermine from within the people's revolutionary front in order that the revolution
could not be consistently implemented.

This latter intrigue has already manifested itself several times. For example, they
sent their diplomatic workers and journalists to the leaders of the right wing of
the democratic league—Luo Longji, Zhan Lan, Hua Nanshe, and to the leader of
the revolutionary committee of the Guomindang Li Jishen (he is en route to the
liberated areas), so as to conduct among them provocative work and efforts to
lure [them in]. We already paid attention to this and must do our best to make
sure that the Americans will not achieve the aim of their intrigue.

12. We have already called a number of comrades to a meeting in the CC, that
is—Gao Gang (secretary of the party committee of Manchuria), Yao Soushi
(secretary of the party committee of eastern China), Bo Yibo (secretary of the
party committee of northern China), Liu Bocheng (commander of the forces of
central China), Chen Yi (commander of the forces of eastern China), Luo
Yunhuan (political commissar of the Manchurian forces), Lin Bocui (chairman of
the government of ShenGanYingXia [sic, possibly Shaanganning?]) so to
discuss the questions of the whole strategy for 1949 (which units should be
responsible for which line of advance, other preparatory works), [and] of the
calling of the second plenum of the CCP CC in the spring of 1949, and others.

Soon after the end of the meeting I will be able to go to Moscow and discuss
with you all the questions, and then after returning from Moscow conduct the
second plenum of the CCP CC.

Around the summer of next year [we] will call the political consultative meeting
of the representatives of various democratic parties, groups and people's
organizations and create a democratic coalition government. Now it is extremely
important to create such a government, all the conditions have become ripe for
this.

[I] request that you report this telegram to comrade main master and to the
VKP(b) CC.

Mao Zedong
30.XII.194‸
