Digital Archive digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org International History Declassified July 07, 1949 Democratic Parties and Groups in the Preparatory Committee to Convene a Political Consultative Conference Citation: “Democratic Parties and Groups in the Preparatory Committee to Convene a Political Consultative Conference,” July 07, 1949, History and Public Policy Program Digital Archive, RGASPI, f. 558, op. 11, d. 328, ll. 63-76. Translated by Gary Goldberg. http://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/134160 Summary: A Russian translation of a Chinese report on groups joining in the preparatory committee for the Political Consultative Conference. Credits: This document was made possible with support from the Blavatnik Family Foundation. Original Language: Russian Contents: English Translation [Translator’s note: The accuracy of the spelling of Chinese names in this document cannot be verified.] Secret Translation from Chinese DEMOCRATIC PARTIES AND GROUP IN THE PREPARATORY C OMMITTEE TO CONVENE A POLITICAL CONSULTATIVE CONFERENCE After the Chinese Conmunist Party published its May 1st appeals in 1948 all the democratic parties and groups which desired to fight imperialism, feudalism, and bureaucratic capital supported our proposals to convene a new political consultative conference. Below we present materials about the political parties and groups which are taking part in the Preparatory Committee to convene a new political consultative conference. 1. The Revolutionary Committee of the Guomindang. The Revolutionary Committee of the Guomindang was formed on 1 January 1948. It included: the Association of the Comrades of the Three Principles of the People of Sun Yat-sen headed by Tan Pingshan (it unofficially includes the Revolutionary Democratic League headed by Wang Konglun), the Association to Promote the Democratization of the Guomindang, and other Guomindang democratic elements. The Revolutionary Democratic League is a secret organization under the influence of our Party. It was formed in 1945 by reorganizing the National Revolutionary League, created in 1941. It includes democratic elements from the Guomindang. For example, it includes: Wang Konglun from the Sun Fo group, Xu Baoju from the Li Jishen group, Lai Yali from the [Feng] Yuxiang group, Lu Zhongrong from the Guangxi group headed by Li Zongren and Bai Chongxi, Qu Wu from the Yu Youren group, Guo Chongtao from the Sichuan-Xikang group, Huang Xianru from the Song Ziwen [T.V. Soong] group, and Kan Chieh-hou [Gan Jiehou] from the group of officials from the personal office of Chiang Kai-shek [Jiang Jieshi]. The League also included members of the CCP Qian Jiongrui, Wang Bingnan, and others. The League fought all the time for a group being created inside the Guomindang favoring the continuation of the war of liberation against Japan, advocated cooperation with the CCP, and took an active part in various democratic parties and groups in order for them to fight for the consolidation of the democratic groups of the country. The League has its own branches in Chongqing, Nanjing, Shanghai, Beijing, and abroad. There are about 200 members in the League. The League was recently purged of such reactionary elements as Gan Jiehou and attracted some progressive instructors and representatives of revolutionary intellectuals to its side. The Association of the Comrades of the Three Principles of the People of Sun Yat-sen was formed in 1944 during negotiations between the Guomindang and the CCP. Initially it operated by holding various interviews. It includes: Tan Pingshan, Chen Mingshu (in the past he commanded the troops of the 19th Sector [napravlenie] of the province of Fujian), Yang Jie (the Southwestern Group), Wang Konglun (the Revolutionary Democratic League), and Yu Zhengying (a democratic group in North China). The Association became officially known in 1945 after our Party proposed the slogan about the formation of a coalition government in China and after the convening of the Sixth Guomindang Congress. The Association accepted the declaration of the 1st Congress of the Guomindang as its platform, favored putting the Three Principles of the People of Sun Yat-sen into practice, and opposed the dictatorship of Chiang Kai-shek. The Association operated legally during the period of operation of the old political consultative conference, but then went underground and operated in the areas of Nanjing, Shanghai, and Hong Kong. The Association has more than 100 members. It includes the main officials of the Revolutionary Democratic League. The Association to Promote the Democratization of the Guomindang was created in Hong Kong in April 1946. Although it includes separate progressive elements it is basically a feudal group which includes Li Jishen, Cai Tingkai, and their people. The provinces of Guangdong, Guangxi, and the countries of the southern seas are areas of its activity. In the autumn of 1947, after the troop of the PLA switched from the defensive to the offensive and a danger to the regime of Chiang Kai-shek was created, Li Jishen wanted to use the moment to create a new Guomindang which would replace the regime of Chiang Kai-shek. Based on these considerations he got in touch with opposition groups inside the Guomindang, and with the Sichuan-Xikang, Guangxi, and Shanxi groups, and began to prepare the formation of a Revolutionary Committee of the Guomindang. At this time Li Jishen had already taken part in the "Great League of Peace and the Unification of the Country" (this League was outwardly led by Sichuan financier Liu Han[Sheng], but behind it was Song Ziwen with his anti-Communist plans. In addition, the League also included He Yingqin, Long Yun, Zhang Qun, and others). At this time Cai Tingkai nearly agreed to take the post of commanding general of the troops "for the extermination of the Communists" in South China. The rapid development of events did not allow them to accomplish their plans. Then on 1 January 1949 the Revolutionary Committee of the Guomindang was created in Hong Kong; Tan Pingshan played a big role in this matter. It included bureaucrats, politicians, and dissatisfied military officials from the group of Li Jishen and Cai Tingkai. At the very start of the formation of the Committee its leadership secretly included even He Yingqin, Zhang Qun, Liu Wengui, and Lü Han. It was stipulated that if all these people clearly opposed Chiang Kai-shek then their joining the committee would be openly announced. Statements which were made in the Committee's name were drafted by such of its senior officials as Tan Pingshan, He Xiangying, Liu Yazi, [Chen] Shaoxian, Mei Gongbing, Li Zhangda, [Chen] Rutang, [Chen] Cisheng, and Zhang Wen, leftist elements or people inclined to the side of the leftists. As a consequence of this, in these documents it spoke of the need to fight the dictatorship of Chiang Kai-shek and against the policy of American imperialism, which is helping the Chiang Kai-shek regime. They suggested being guided by the policy of three political principles (an Alignment with the CCP, Alliance with the USSR, and the support of the workers and peasants) and insisted on the formation of a democratic coalition government. Finally, they advocated support of our appeals of 1 May 1948. Nevertheless, before their arrival in the north in their practical activity the group of Li Jishen and Cai Tingkai fought for close relations with the US and restrictions on the CCP. It secretly conceived of an anti-Communist "movement of five people" (these five people were: Li Jishen, [Feng] Yuxiang, Zhang Lan, Zhan Bojun, and one such person as Huang Yanpei, Lo Longji, [or] Cai Tingkai). The group created the movement, "the organization of ten people" (these ten people are the following: Li Jishen, Cai Tingkai, [Feng] Yuxiang, Zhang Lan, Huang Yanpei, Lo Longji, Zhang Bojun, Zhou Bingwen, Lu Guangsheng, and Zhang Dongsun). In addition, the group prompted individual militarists to "revolt", sent letters to Yan Xishan, Liu Wengui, and Bai Chongxi in which it advised them to make statements of the establishment of a cease-fire in the Civil War in China, take the position of mediators, and make us of the result of the fall of Chiang Kai-shek in order to preserve their forces, enter into a coalition government, and get in touch with the British and American imperialists in order to get aid from them. In general, they pursued the goal of getting in touch with the right wing of the bourgeoisie, forming an opposition, and establishing ties with local militarist groups, and thereby preparing the ground to take into their hands a leading role in the country for themselves, restrict the forces of the CCP, and finally take the position left by Chiang Kai-shek. In the winter of 1948 Li Jishen was slow in arriving in the North for various reasons. At this time a fierce battle was going on in the ranks of the Revolutionary Committee of the Guomindang between the rightist and leftist groups. Then, in connection with the change of the situation in the country, Li Jishen finally went to North China, which meant the victory of the left wing. The third day after Li Jishen's departure from Hong Kong for the North Huang Shaoxun (a member of the Guangxi group and a representative of Li Zongren and Bai Chongxi) arrived. In connection with the departure of Li Jishen for the North he became aware that the scheme of Bai Chongxi, who had intended to raise a rebellion against Chiang Kai-shek, invite the Central Committee of the Revolutionary Committee [SIC] of the Guomindang to Hankou, and divide China with the Communists into two parts, had completely failed. Members of the Revolutionary Committee of the Guomindang who had arrived in the North are basically leftist elements and centrists leaning toward the side of the leftists. They were numerically superior, and therefore the rightist group in the Committee found itself to be politically isolated and lost the initiative.