 1949            Speeches/Documents

 Title: Telegram to Liu

 Author: Mao zedong

 Date: December            Source:. See Pei Jianzhang et al., Zhonghua renmin gongheguo waijiaoshi [A
 18,1949                   Diplomatic History of the People’s Republic of China] (Beijing: World Affairs
                           Press, 1994), pp.17- 18.)
                           http://digitalarchive.wilsoncenter.org/document/110393

 Description:.
 (1) [I] arrived in Moscow on the 16th, and met with Stalin for two hours at 10 p.m. (Beijing time). His
attitude was really sincere. The questions involved include the prospect of peace the treaty, loans,
Taiwan, and the publication of my selected works.
(2) Stalin said that the Americans are afraid of war. The Americans ask other countries to fight the war
[for them], but other countries are also afraid of fighting a war. According to him, it is unlikely that a war
will break out, and we agree with his opinions.
(3) With regard to the question of the treaty, Stalin said that because of the Yalta agreement, it is
improper for us to overturn the legitimacy of the old Chinese-Soviet treaty. If we are to abolish the old
treaty and to sign a new treaty, the status of the Kurile Islands will be changed, and the United States
will have an excuse to take away the Kurile Islands. Therefore, on the question of the Soviet Union’s
thirty-year lease of Lushun [Port Arthur], we should not change it in format; however, in reality, the
Soviet Union will withdraw its troops from Lushun and will let Chinese troops occupy it. I expressed
[the view] that too early a withdrawal [of the Soviet troops from Lushun] will create unfavorable
conditions for us. He replied that the Soviet withdrawal of troops [from Lushun] does not mean that the
Soviet Union will stand by with folded arms [in a crisis]; rather, it is possible to find ways through which
China will not become the first to bear the brunt. His opinion is that we may sign a statement, which
will solve the Lushun problem in accordance with the above-mentioned ideas, and that by doing so,
China will also gain political capital [zhengzhi ziben]. I said that it is necessary for us to maintain the
legitimacy of the Yalta agreement. However, the public opinion in China believes that as the old treaty
was signed by the Guomindang, it has lost its standing with the Guomindang’s downfall. He replied
that the old treaty needs to be revised, and that the revision is necessarily substantial, but it will not
come until two years from now.
(4) Stalin said that it is unnecessary for the Foreign Minister [Zhou Enlai] to fly here just for signing a
statement. I told him that I will consider it. I hope that the commercial, loan and aviation agreements
will be signed at the same time, and Premier [Zhou Enlai] should come. It is hoped that the Politburo
will discuss how to solve the treaty problem and offer its opinions.
