Exemption To Foreign Political Bodies In S’pore Withd,,
China Democratic League &
K. M. T. Affected
‘AN OBSTACLE TO DEVELOPMENT OF A S’PORE
PULILILAL CUNSUIUUSNESS,” SAYS GOVT.
“The local organisation Of foreign political associa-
/ions in Singapore is an obstacte to the deveiopmeit
oi a Singapore political consciousness, and the excciil-
sion oF political associations irom the scope ot the
Societies Ordinance should be confined to Malayan
Political Associationst” says an Official Press Keiease
issued by the Public Relations Department, Singapore,
which turther announces the deietion, tor the avove
reason, of the China Democratic League and the Kuo
Min tang trom the list of potitical bodies which at
present are excluded trom the provisions of the Socie-
ties Ordinance as polttions associations.
Following is the full text ot Lue |
Oliicial ress meicase --—
“Waoach tne pocieties Ordinance
was re-introducea 1n 494( 1t Was
enipnasisead that the Oralnance
Was necessary in order to combat
tne crime wave whicn was being
losterea by gangster Societies. in
oraer, however, to remove any Mis-
apprenension that the Orainance
Would Nave any ellect on legiti-
mate political organisations in
Singapore, an amenament to the
Orainance Was enacted Wwnherebdy
any organisation which the Gover-
nor in Council snouid deciare to be
aa polllical association shnouid be
exciuaed from the dennition ol
“society” and would, thereiore, not
come under tne provision oi tne
Ordinance,
“The reason, thereiore, for this
amendment was because it Was
realised that there could be no ad-
vanee towards democratic self-
goverament without the tormation
Ol puiilical parties Whicn could
function treeiy and by Whicn
people of Singapore could recelve
ine political eaucation which would
chavuie them to play their part in
an eiecved democracy. ‘he smal.
proportion OL tnose eligioie, now-
ever, Who registered for the elec-
tions ior the Legislative Council
aug tobe mMUnICipal COoMmMnilissi0(i,
snowed that slow progress is being
imuade in tnis respect. Jt is consi-
dered tnat the loeal organisation
of toreign political associations in
Singapore is an oostacle to the
aevelopment ol a Singapore politi-
cai consciousness, and that the ex-:
clusion oi poiitical associations
trom the scope of the Societies
(ardinance should be confined to
Malayan poiitical associations.
“Action is, therefore, being taken
(tO aesete the Hamme or i10reigh Orga-
4sa5aciuiis ATOUL touese  Waiiicu  luave
been gazevted as puiilical assucia-
igus under section ~< (i) OL tHe
Ssecieues Urdadinance. Lhe positon
Wiil tnen be wnat such Lureiga poii-
tical Organisations will came unuuer
tue Provisions OF tne Socievues Urdi-
nance and li tiley wisi Lv inaintain
vuranches in tne Coiony Will Dave
tO apply ior registration or exemp-
10 irom registrakion. Such ap-
plications, if made, would ve con-
sidered on Uneir merits.
“ut even li registration were not
pernitted foreign poiitical organi-
sations Will not be, as such, imegai
eocielreS In the Colony, UM, and so
iong as they are organised wnoilly
outsiae Malaya, and il, and so long
as no brancoes are maintained in
ihe Colony, ana no subscriptions
are collected or solicited in the
volony. ‘Lhe Government can have
uO Objections to allens in Maiaya
veing, aS individuais, members ot
political associations in their coun-
(ry Of origin, provided such mem-
bers abide by the laws of the
Colony. Sucn membership is pro-
vided for by Section 1U ol the So-
cieties Ordinance.
ciations are are follows:—
“the Soqeties at present excilud-
ed from the provisions of the Sv-
cieties Ordinance as political asso-
(hina Democratic League
Kuo Min Tang
Matayan Indian Congress
Malayan Nationalist Party.
Malay Union
Pusat Lenaga Ra’‘ayat
The Progressive Party
the Labour Party of Singapore.
“OL these the first two, as being
foreign organisations, are now be-
ing deleted.”