China’s Charter
Of Freedom   |
Chungking, March 18.—A charter of freedom for the
national reconstruction of China has been drawn up by an
All Party Conference, comprising representatives of the
Communist, the Democratic League and Youth Party as
well as those of President Chiang Kai-shek’s government,
writes Doom Campbell, Reuter’s Correspondent.
After centuries of feudal
government and years of one
party, monopolistic rule, de-
mocracy is being given a
chance to work in a nation of
over four hundred million
people.
It has been called China’s Magna
Carta and its preamble explains that
its programme is intended “to serve
as a guide for the government, pend-
ing the inauguration of constitutional
government.’
The charter calls for the union of
all forces of the nation under the gui-
dance of President Chiang Kai-shek to
construct a new, unified, free and
democratic China. It recognises that
the democratisation of politics, the
nationalisation of armies and_ the
equality and legal status of all political
parties are necessary preliminaries to
peaceful national reconstruction.
INDIVIDUAL FREEDOM
The charter lays it down that poli-
tical disputes must be settled by poli-
tical means and that the freedom of
the individual, of thought, religion,
speech and the press, together with
the rights of free assembly, residence
and correspondence must be guaran-
teed.
The power to arrest, try and punish
is reserved for the police and the
judiciary. The charter urges that
the Habeas Corpus Law, already pro-
mulgated by the Government, should
be put into operation at an early date.
Women are to be given political,
social, educational and economic
equality. To allow for the diver-
sities of a huge country like China,
legislation must take into conside-
ration the interests of all localities,
classes and professions.
Sweeping administrative reforms are
contemplated, including the abolition
of unnecessary government offices, the
simplification of procedure and  the
introduction of individual responsl- ;
bility among civil servants, It 1
urged that government employees
should only be appointed on grounds
of ability and past experience instead
of on personal and party allegiance.
Provincial, district and municipal
councils as well as district magistrates
are contemplated, while the respective
jurisdiction of the central and local
governments will be regulated on the
principle of “‘a fair distribution of
power,”
The charter provides that the armed
forces of China should no longer be
the sport of individuals or vested in-
terests. The army is to be separated
from politics and the military system
reformed in accordance with demo-
cratic institutions, Conscription will
provide the basis of military service
and is to be applied fairly throughout
the whole country.
The conduct of foreign affairs is to
be based upon the Atlantic Charter,
the Cairo Declaration, the Moscow
Four Power Declaration and the United
Nations Organisation. China — will
take an active part in UNO in order}
to preserve world peace.
All remnants of Japanese influence
are to be extirpated in accordance |
with the Potsdam Declaration, and it |
is urged that the future of Japan
should be settled in cooperation with
other nations so as to prevent the re-
surgence of Japanese militarism and to
guarantee the security of the Far East. |
Friendly relations with the United
States, the Soviet Union, Britain, |,
France and other democratic countries |.
are especially advocated.           :
The industrial development of China |
occupies a prominent place in  the
new Charter. The convening of a]
National Economic Conference 1
urged at which national representa- |
tives will decide upon the measures ||
to be adopted. Vigorous steps are |.
contemplated for the construction of
additional railways, roads, harbours, |
irrigation, inland waterways and other |
public works.                      |
A section of the charter stipulates
that government servants are to  be |
prohibited from taking advantage of |
their official posts to indulge in specu-
lation, cornering commodities, evading
taxation, smuggling and other prac-
tices so common in the old China.
BETTERMENT OF WORKMEN
The betterment of the peasantry
is among the most important objects
of the Charter, the principal aim
being to enable the peasants to own
the land they farm. Afforestation,
the conservation of water and soil,
development of livestock, fostering
of agricultural research and utilisa-
tion of modern equipment are
strongly advocated.
The Chinese workwmen are also to
be benefited under the Charter.
Conditions of labour are to be im-
' proved, a bonus system will be tried
out and unemployment and disable-
ment insurances will be started.
Child and female labour will be
specially protected.
The Charter contemplates the
framing of annual budgets, together
| with the curtailment of public expen-
|diture and balancing or revenue and
expenditure. The currency is to be
|deflated and the monetary system
‘| stabilised, while floating of domestic
and foreign loans is to be made subject
|to public supervision. A reform of
.| the system of taxation is also promised.
| EDUCATION AND CULTURE
: Great emphasis is laid upon educa-
|] tion and cultural development. The
全 to study is to be guaranteed and |
A hws cutee beliefs and political ideolo-
‘| Sigs are not to be allowed to interfere
|  ws arse and university administra-
. Scientific research and artistic
talent are to be encouraged to raise
the cultural level of the nation.
Compulsory education is to be made
nation-wide and a great campaign 1s
to be started to abolish illiteracy.
Technical training colleges will also be
developed. The expansion of public
health organisation and physical exer-
cises are to be encouraged threughout
China, with special emphasis upon all
forms of child welfare.
The wartime censorship of the
press, the films, the theatre, as well
as private letters and telegrams is to
be abolished, and assistance is urged
for businesses connected with books,
newspapers, news agencies, the drama
and motion pictures.
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek has
commended the Charter as follows:
轉 personally regard the pregramme of
peaceful national reconstruction as the
basis of all other proposals. It affords
a most suitable bridge towards consti-
tutional government. With this pro-
gramme before us, the Central Govern-
ment as well as local administrations
and leaders of the various _ political
parties and all citizens will have com-
‘mon standards to uphold.”—Reuter.