? 


Approved For Release 2000/0 ~CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


COPY NO. 13 


‘ 


FAR EAST/PaCI FIC BRANCH 
OFSICE OF REPORTS AND ESTIMATES 


CUNTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 


ST..fF STUDY PROJSCT NO.S 


COMMUNIST INFLUENCE IN BURMA 


WORKING PAPER 


NOTICE: This document is a working paper, not 
an official CLA issuances It has been co-ordina- 
ted within ORE, but not with the IAC agencies. 

It represents current thinking by specialists in 
CIA, and is designed for use by other engaged in 
similar or overlapping studies. The opinions 
expressed herein may be revised before final and 
official publication. It is intended solely for 
the information of the addressee and not for fur- 
ther dissemination. 


Copy for: 


Chi 
Deputy Chief, B/FE DOCUMENT NO. 


snare 

eons INCLASS, OJ ad 
DECLASSIFIED : ae 

CLASS. CHANGED TO: TS 8 ¢ 

NEXT REVIEW DATE: 

AUTEIy HA PY 4 aa 

DATE: U REVIEWER: 372044 | 


ee 


Approved For Release 2000/08/29 : CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


Approved For Release 2000/08/29 : CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 
Seodieniicidemlteal 


fe eis B/FE Staff Study 
a ; 23 August 1949 
COMMUNIST INFLUSNCE IN BURMA 


SUMMARY 


Communism has only recently become an important factor in Burmese 
politics. For a short period after the end of the war Commmnists dominated 
the most influential political organization in Burma. They were out- 
maneuvered, however, by non-commmist elements, split into two factions and 
eliminated from the government. Nevertheless, the relatively few Commmists 
have retained considerable popular support and, because of the widespread 


acceptance of Marxist theory in contemporary Burmese politics, have been able 


to exert an influence far out of proportion to thoir actual numbers. 

Both Commnist Parties are now in armed rebellion against the Burmese 
Government. The Burma Commmist Party (BCP), the larger and more influential, 
has shown increasing conformity to the Moscow line, and has obviously been 
strongly influenced by Chinese Commmist policies. Cormunist elements have 
contributed heavily to the prevailing political and economic instability in 
Burma. They have taken advantage of the instability to oxtend their influence 
and to seek new allies in order to develop a popular front through which to 
achieve their ultimate objeotive--uncisputed political control of Burma. The 
BCP is known to have maintained extensive liaison with the Communist Party of 

| India, and is suspected of being in contact with Chinese and Indochinese 


Communists. No direct contact with the Soviets, except ata few international 


gatherings, is known. 


Approved For Release 2000/08/29 : CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


f « : 


| 
I 
L 
I 


Approved For Release 2000/08/29 : CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 
a — 


Burmese bovernment countermeasures against the Communists have not 
yet been successful. Although the Government possesses superior manpower 
‘and material resources, it is not likely to suppress effectively the Commmist 
insurrention in the near future and prolonged guerrilla warfare is likely. 
On the other hand, the Commumists appear to be incapable of overthrowing the 
Government in the immediate future without considerable outside assistance. 
The utilization of Western assistance by the Burmese governnent, which might 
give it the necessary strength to establish itself as the genuine advocate of 
nationalism and improved conditions in Burma and at the same time identify the 
Commmists as proponents of violence acting under foreign instruction, is a 
complex and delicate problem. Moreover, the speed at which adverse events are 
taking place in China leaves little time in Burma for developments favorable 


to the vaste 


Approved For Release 2000/08/29 : CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


es 


yeorepeet 


Approved For Release 2000/08/2™=GraemPr 7 9-01082A000100030008-9 


Staff Study #6 
23 August 1949 


COMMUNIST INFLUENCE IN BURMA 


Introduction 

Communism is a relatively recent phenomenon in Burma. Although a 
small group of Burmese, mostly university students, were inspired by 
communist literature and participated in speradic communistic activities 
during the mid-thirties, there was no formally organized Communist Party 
until 1944. The development of a cohesive Communist movement began to 
evolve in 192 when all Communist-inclined Burmese united in common 
opposition to the Japanese and advocated unqualified support of the Allies. 
Because they were instrumental in organizing and directing the Burmese 
resistance to the Japanese, the Communists emerged from the war with their 
prestige and popularity tremendously enhanced, 

In August 19), the Communists were primarily responsible for the 
amalgamation of various elements of the resistances into the Anti~Fascist 
Peoples’ Freedom League (AFPFL), the only effective political force in 
Burma at the war's end. Communists-held key positions in the AFPFL and 
the Burma Communist Party (BCP) constituted its largest and best organized 
component. The Communists undertook a strenuous effort to gain complete 
control of the AFPFL and to this end conducted an intense campaign to 
strengthen the party and broaden its popular base. Until early 1916, 
the BCP was able to dominate the AFPFL, but it never achieved complete 
control. Gradually, its drive for power aroused anti-Communist sentiment 
within the AFPFL and led to the formation of a non-Commmnist coalition 


which, with considerable adroitness, split the BCP and forced the with= 
i 


Approved For Release 2000/08 -RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


Approved For Release 2000/08/2r=GtieFSP 7 9-01082A000100030008-9 


drawal from the League of both factions. ‘The two Communist troups there= 
upon became the first effectively organized opposition to the AFPFL. The 
Communist Party (Burma), (CPS), popularly called Red Flags, was organized 
in March 196 and Cees a@ campaign of violence almost from the date 
of its birth. The Burma Communist Party (BCP) faction, which retained the 
title, is the more important and influential of the two Commumist parties 
despite a sizeable loss of membership. Although the BCP also instigated 
unrest after its expulsion from the AFPFL in November 1916, it temporarily 
avoided overt violence. Rather, the BCP sought a rapprochement with the 
AFPFL and might have succeeded had it not insisted upon the unconditional 
acceptance of its termsc . 

In February 1948, acting on orders belisved to have originated with 
the Soviet Ambassador in New Delhi and transmitted by the Communist Party 
of India, the BCP radically altered its policies and embarked upon a 
program of extreme agitation directed against the AFPFL and the Government 
it sponsored, The Commmist press immediately commenced. a campaign of 
abuse and vilification, BCP leaders openly advocated overthrowing the 
Goverment, a series of strikes developsd, and there were strong indica= 
tions that the BCP planned to establish parallel administrations in the 
areas of central Burma which it dominated. On 28 March, the Government 
finally took action by foreeably breaking the strikes and arresting as many 
Communists as possible. However, al]. important BCP leaders escaped and a 
full-fledged Communist insurrection soon commenced under their direction. 
Sources of Communist Strength 

The causes underlying the birth and growth of Communism in Burma 
not difficult to ascertain, More than a hundred years of foreign rule 

2 


Approved For Release 2000/08/29; P79-01082A000100030008-9 


Approved For Release 2000/08/29 ™@?R@RBP?9-01082A000100030008-9 


created a number of circumstances highly favorable to Communist exploita= 
tion. Chief among these wes the natural, and nearly universal Burmese 
resentment of foreign domination. puptiaetss while the British colonial 
administration was, in many respects, highly enlightened and beneficial 
to Burma, it was far os a blessings Under a policy of laissez faire 
and the impersonal rule cf law the old Burmese social order collapsed and 
was not adequately replaced by Western institutions. Agrarian indebted- 
ness, dispossession and general economic distress became widespread, and 
control of the country's entire sconanic life paased increasingly into | 
foreign hands. Another unfortuncte aspect of British rule was a military 
policy of excluding Burmans from the armed forces while recrviting among 
the Karen, Chin and Kachin sirioit ties who, along with imported Indian 
troops, were used to maintain order. In all, the general disorganization 
of Burmese society, economic hardship and the inability of Burmese to 
participate in the development and defense of their country led to the 
development of a spirit of intense nationalism and to a wide acceptance 
of Marxism, including the Stalinist variety. 

Communism in Burma made considerable popular headway during and 
after the last war. The Commumists' initiative in organizing the 
resistance movement and the AFPFL permitted them to capitalize upon the 
popularity of Communist resistance leaders and to identify Communism 
with nationalism, In terms of finances, organization ani a defined party 
program, the Comumists held and utilized a tremendous advantage over 
other political groups. Meanwhile, tha serious dislocations caused by 
ites and a half years of wer served to enhance the appeal of easy 
Communist promises and simple solutions of Burmese grievances. In/ addition, 


Approved For Release 2000/08/2 BP79-01082A000100030008-9 


ney ae 


Approved For Release 2000/08/2asieG@tie#i@P 7 9-01082A000100030008-9 


the Communists have been able to utilize the extremely individualistic 
Burman native, the general distrust of and resistance to Governmental 
authority and endemic lawlessness for their own purposes. They have also 
been able to exploit the admiration of many young Burmese for Soviet 
economic and military accomplishments. The Communists have struck respon= 
sive chords by criticizing the numerous glaring wealmesses and shortcomings 
of the AFPFL and the Burmese Government and have profited by some of the 
Government's anti-Communist measures which have injured the innocent as 
well as the guilty. Finally, the March 198 rebellion led by a large part. 
of the Communist—inclined Peoples’ Volunteer Organization (PVO), one of 
the two major components of the AFPFL after the Communists had been 
expelled, and the January 199 revolt of the Karens, the largest ethnic 
minority group in Burma, have provided the Commmists with new opportunities 


to extend their influence. Not only do these disaffections further 


contribute to instability in Burma, but they pave the way for the Communists, 


who were once fairly well isolated, to ‘seek new allies to augment their 
own efforts for the overthrow of the existing regime. 
THE BURMA COMMUNIST PARTY 
Organization 

The organization of the BCP appears to be similar to that of other 
Communist parties throughout the world. The familiar system of "demo= 
cratic centralization" of power has been adopted. Supreme authority is 
vested in a three-man Politburo thsoretically elected and responsible to 
a Central Committee, which, in turn, is accountable to periodic Party 
Conferences. The last conference was held in Feburary 198 for the pure 

h 


SEC T 
Approved For Release 2000/08/29 ""€IA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


There is a propaganda section whose activity has been curtailed and a 


Approved For Release 2000/08/29" Cf aerRDr 7 9-01082A000100030008-9 


pose of endorsing the Politburo's decision to implement the new revolutionary 
policy emanating from India. Below the national level, the Communists 
established upper and lower Burma commands over organizations supervised 

by District Secretary Generals and Central Committees. There is evidence 
that the Communist organization is further subdivided into township and 
village tract groups and that a separate wit, perhaps ranking with the 
district level, is maintained in Rangoon and possibly Mandalay. The smallest 
and basic unit is, of course, the call. 


Considerably less clear is the functional division within the BCP. 


women's section, known as the Womens! Congress, In addition, there is 
undoubtedly an organizational section charged with the recruitment of new 
party members, the prommtion of front organizations, and the infiltration 
and exploitation of other groups and associations. Finally, there appears 
to be a military section the structure of which closely parallels BCP 
political frame work. In many cases the two ara indistinguishable. The 
Politburo dictates military as well as political policy although imple=- 
mentation is unquestionably largely conducted by local commanders. 
The reported "supreme commander" of all Commmist military forces is a | 
member of the Central Committee to whom all District and Township Military 
Committees, which almost certainly also exercise political control in 
their respective arsas, are responsible. 

BCP organization has undoubtedly been adversely affected by the 


necessity of operating underground. The effectiveness of its chain of 


‘command undoubtedly varies from area to area and from group to group. 


5 
SE = T 
Approved For Release 2000/08/29%CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


Approved For Release 2000/08/20 CTA RDP 7 9-01082A000100030008-9 


It is probably also hampered by personal rivalries and the independent 
tendencies of locd. leaders. Nevertheless, the BCP continues to function 
with a reasonable degree of efficiency and continues capable of maintain= 
ing pressure on the government and of expanding its activities whenever 
an opportunity is presented. 

Leadership 

The undisputed leader of the BCP is its Secretary General, Thakin 
Than Tun. Than Tun emerged as a Communist leader in the thirties, rose 
to prominence in the resistance movement and wag Secretary General of the 
AFPFL until the Communists were expelled, Of all thse Burmese Communists, 
Than Tum probably best understands Commmist ideology and its applicability 
to Burmae While appearing to lack cartain qualities of leadership, Than 
Tun has demonstrated a considerable capacity for organization and 
administration. As far as can be determined, he has steadfastly conformed 
to orthodox party principles and directives and has given no indication 
of "nationalist deviation." He appears to have the solid support of the 
Central Committee and, if recent publications in the Soviet press are any 
indication, his leadership has the sanction of the Kremlin and his saatty 
is recognized as the "official" Communist Party in Burma. 

The only other BCP leader to attain substantial international 
prominence is H. N. Goshal, a Burma~born Indian. Goshal is well-indoctri-~ 
nated and has had extensive experience as a Communist agitator in both 
the Indian and Burmese labor movements. After the war he became a member 
of the BCP's Politburo. He has served the party by proselytizing Indian 
laborers and cultivators, and by effecting liaison with the Communist 

6 


5 ET 
Approved For Release 2000/08/%9 : CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


ce Ae 


mesa | 


Approved For Release 2000/08/25 "1m reewr7 9-01082A000100030008-9 


Party of India. It was Goshal who, while in India, ostensibly wrote 
and then delivered the document upon which the BCP based its revolutionary 
programs In late 1918, Goshal was reported to have clashed with Than Tun 
by savocnting the abandonment of viclence. Later, when severely censured 
by the Central Committee, he is supposed to have recanted. However, as a 
result, he may have lost his position on the Politburo and suffered a loss 
of prestige and influence in the party. 

With a very few exceptions, other BCP functionaries are young 
men whose individual capabilities cannot be accurately assessed. Unlike 
Than Tun, it is doubtful that many of these have more than a superficial 
understanding of Communism and all its ramifications, especially its 
inherent danger to sovereignty. Although personal rivalries quite 
probably exist within the BCP, as evidenced by the occasional differences 
of opinion with which Than Tun has had to contend, they have not reached 
disruptive proportions. On the contrary, the BCP leaders seem to work 
with reasonable consonance, have kept the Commmist machine functioning 
with a relatively high degree of disciplines and efficiency, and have given 
no indication of digressing from their present course in the foresesable 
futurea 
Strength 

The exact numerical strength of the BCP cannot be accurately 
estimated because the lines separating Comunists, actual and intimidated 
sympathizers and lawless bands operating under the cloak of Communism, 
are very indistinct. Rank and file party members are mostly opportunistic 
followers of locdl leaders, those —_ bear a grievance against the govern- 


7 


RET 


Approved For Release 2000/08/2$ : CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


revatio tam fatnbtmy | FMR pemme 


Approved For Release 2000/0829" TR RDP 7 9-01082A000100030008-9 


ment, or those who have succumbed to Communist propanganda which promises 
improvement of their standard of living. While several widely varying 


estimates of BCP strength have been attempted, none appears to have 


significant factual basis. Judging from the limited information available, 


actual membership of the BOP probably does not exceed a few thousand. 
The BCP's influence, however, is substantially greater than its numerical 
strength would indicate. It commands a considerable popvlar following 
(perhaps several hundred thousand) throughout a large part of Burma, 
especially in those rural areas of central and southern Burma where it has 
exercised moreor less de facto control since the end of the war. 
Distribution of Influence 

Before the BCP commenced its insurrection, it maintained three 
major front groups designed to promote the cause of Communism among those 
elements considered most susceptible to Commumist indoctrination, i.e, 
peasants, laborers, and youths. These organs were the All-—Burma Peasants! 
Union which claimed 298,000 members, the All-Burma Trade Union Congrees, 
an important component in Burma's small trade union movement, and the 
Peoples’ Democratic Youth League (Red Guards) claiming a membership of 
20,000 political enthusiasts. While menbership figures were quite 
probably an exaggeration, these orgenizations were unquestionably of 
considerable importance and counted adherents scattered over two-thirds 
of Burma. Although they have since disintegrated, or at least gone 
underground, most of their members are presumed to retain strong pro=- 
Communist sympathies and constitute the bulk of the Communists’ present 
popular following. 


SES T 


Approved For Release 200 129: CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-8 


Approved For Release 2000/08/20sm@tieliRi@-0 1082A000100030008-9 


The prevailing political atmosphere in Burma has provided 
Communists the opportunity to infiltrate and influence several prominent 
non-Communist organizations. Among these are the All-Burma Students! 
Union, the Rangoon University Students? Union, the All-Burma Muslin 
League and the All~Burma Ministerial Services Union, all of whom when 
cornbined, form a very significant force in Burmese politics. Further- 
more, the Communists have been able to take advantage of pro-Communist 
tendencies in the PVO and to a lesser extent in military and police 
units where they have been able to promote some unrest and desertions. 

Although genuine Communist publications have been suspended, their 
views still receive fairly wide dissemination. The BCP somehow continues 
to produce handbills and pamphlets which are circulated rather freely, 
even in Rangoon. In addition, some left-wing newspaper continue to carry 
party~line material, although refraining from severe criticism of the 
Government. In November 1918, a number of ultra~leftist journalists 
formed a semi-political organization known as the New “ra Writers 
Association dedicated to the advancement of "new democracy." Its material, 
published without Governmental interference, is hardly distinguishable 
from that of the Communists. Finally, Communist literature, in both the 
English and Burmese languages, can be purchased at a " Peoples Literature 
House" in Rangoon, which is know to have been financed and established 
by the Communist Party of India with the cooperation of Goshal. 

Since it went underground, the BCP appears to have made strenuous 
efforts to develop new front organizations, They have been reported as 
establishing "Democratic Fronts" in several districts, a "Peoples! New 

9 


RET 
9 : CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


Approved For Release 2000/0 


sscnterd Fitton 


Approved For Release 2000/08/2PP¢tROr 7 9-01082A000100030008-9 


Democratic Army," and strongly influencing a "New Democratic Front" in 
Rangoon led by extremist elements of the All-Burma Ministerial Services 
Union and the All-Burma Students Union. In March 199, BCP succeeded 
the "Peoples' Democratic Front" (PDF), in forming a coalition with an 
undetermined number of PVO's and army mutineers who heretofore had been 
conducting their ow separate rebellions. While the lasting qualities 
of this coalition have not been demonstrated and there is evidence of 
growing friction between its component elements, it is potentially the 
most serious threat to the restoration of stability in Burma, especially 
if it falls completely under BCP control. The PDF already dominates . 
considerable territory and has a relatively large and well-armed military 
force at its disposal. It would appear to offer the BCP an ideal oppor 
tunity to develop a broad "popular front" novement without which itz is 
highly unlikely that the Communists could achieve domination of Burma. 

Geographically, the BCP controls several relatively small and 
scattered areas in the Irrawaddy end Sittang River valleys and throughout 
the Irrawaddy Delta area. It seems unlikely, however, that the BCP 
could control as much territory as it does if it were the only group in 
rebellion against the Government. The POF and independent PVO groups 
control a solid bloc of territory along the Irrawaddy stretching from 
about 30 miles north of Rangoon tc some 125 miles north of Mandalay as 
well as other substantial areas, including parts of Tenasserim in the 
south and the Shan and Kachin States in the east and north. Although all 
PDF and PVO=controlled territory should not be considered Comaunist— 


dominated, it is probable that they are susceptible to Communist penetration. 


10 


Approved For Release 2000/0829 : CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


Approved For Release 2000/08/29 Ct mbt 7 9-01082A000100030008-9 


Military Activities 

BCP military activities are conducted almost exclusively by small 
guerrilla bands operating on a hit-and-run basis in widely separated areas. 
These bands are well-supplied with an assortment of small calibre Japanese, 
British and American small arms, While the Communists have been able to 
capture numerous poorly defended towns and villages, they have been unable 


to hold a given position against determined Covernment attack and have 


consciously avoided engaging in pitched battles wherever possible. Although 


numerically and materially weeker than the Government forces, the Communists 
enjoy such advantages as favorable terrain, extreme maneuverability and 
capacity to fade into the local populace. Furthermore, they are opposed 

by forces both limited and inexperienced which must cops with other 
insurgents and which are capable of giving adequate and continuing pro= 
tection only to selected centers of population. Consequently, the BCP 

has not been suppressed, or is it Likely to be in the predictable future. 

The ultimate objective of toe BCP's military campaign is, of course, 
to wrest political power from any existing non-Communist regime. However, 
until such time as the BCP is able to develop a force capable of making 
successful frontal assault upon the Government, it must continue to 
resort to guerrilla tactics as the best means of undermining the Govern= 
ment's authority and aggravating national instability. 

Military relations between the BCP and other insurgent groups are 
obscure, largely because of the difficulty often encountered in identify= 
ing the participants in any given engagement. Nevertheless, there are 
strong indications that on several occasions it has cooperated with 


lL 


Approved For Release 2000/08/2%: CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


Approved For Release 2000/08/29 : CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


Government and PVO forces against the Karens. In other cases, however, 

4% is reported to have avoided fighting the Karens and to have moved 

into areas cleared, but later evacuated, by the Karens. Despite Govern~ 
ment allegations, there is very little evidence of premeditated cooperation 
between the BCP and the Karens. Clashes between BOP forces and Red Flag 
Communists have been frequent and there is reason to believe that the 
mutual animosity of the two Communist groups is bitter and deep-seated. 
Despite the formation of the PDF and Communist efforts to avoid antagonizing 


ene Se 


the PVO, there have been conflicts between the two and there are indica~ 
tions of growing friction within the framework of the PDF over the matters 
of spheres of influence and local leadership. 

Ag long as the various rebel groups remain divided and mutually 
antagonistic, the Government may be able to hold its om militarily for 
some time to come. Nevertheless, Communist military activity contributes 
to the reduction of almost all Government revenues while at the same time 
forces steadily increased non-productive military expenditures and seriously 
hampers effective administration by creating widespread unrest. As a 
result, economic deterioration may be a greater threat to the Government 
than direct military action. 

Plans and Policies 
BCP policies, originally almost purely based on nationalism and 
identical to those of the AFPFL, have since become increasingly doctrin= 
aireo Nevertheless, the primary source of friction between the BCP and 
the Socialist-dominated AFPFL may be traced to AFPFL efforts to attain 
independence and implement a Marxist program without resorting to violence, 
12 


SE 


Approved For Release 2000/08/23": CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


} 


Approved For Release 2000/08/28 tix Rb? 7 9-01082A000100030008-9 


rather than to any fundamental differences regarding the acceptability of 
Communism. As a result, the Anglo~Burmese Treaty, which includes impor~ 
tant concessions to the UK in return for independence, has become the chief 


medium of BOP propaganda attacks upon the Burmese Government. For 


obligating Burma to honor foreign debts, to pay compensation for nationalized 


foreign property and to accept a British Military Mission, the BCP accuses 
the AFPFL's “right wing" of selling out to Anglo-American "capitalist~ 
imperialists," accepting sham independence, completely betraying their | 
trevolutionary” principles and becoming "fascists," In addition, steadily 
deteriorating conditions in Burma have forced the Government to seek 
relief by modifying its extreme leftist policies and seeking closer re- 
lations with the West, thus providing the BCP with further "proof of 
ite "reactionary" tendencies» 

| The most recent expression of BCP policies appears in the manifesto 
announcing the formation of the PDF, which, although signed by representa~ 
tives of all participating elements, was undoubtedly written by the 
Comumists. It presents a comprehensive politico-economic program which 
generally conforms to the internal "party line" and in many respects is 


strikingly similar to the policies of the Chinese Comunist Party. 


Clearly, the first objective is the development of the PDF into an effeo- 


tive political and military organization under BCP leadership. The entire 
organization is to be managed "democratically" by a nine=man Executive 
Committee, representing the three components equally. Popular support 
is to be developed by district, township and village committees, Member- 
ship, however, is to be on individual basis; members cannot be anti~ 
Commmist and must faithfully adhere to all Executive directives. The 

13 


Approved For Release 2000/08/29 DPF 9-01082A000100030008-9 


v 


Approved For Release 2000/08/27 9 -01082A000100030008-9 


military forces are to retain their separate identity temporarily, but 
operations are to be directed by a Joint Sumpreme Council which is 
charged with the additions] responsibility of forging a single "army." 
The primary task of the POF is to overthrow the present Government 
and replace it with a Peoples Democratic Republican State based upon a 
new "peoplast denccratic" constituition, to eliminate local landlords, 
capitalists and "civil war oriminalis. To this end, the “agrarian 


| revolution" 4a to be commenced in areas where circumstances are favorable, 
“and thosa areas "Liberated." "Public enemies" (Governmental officials) 


are to be nade ‘prisoners of war,” but those who cooperate may be en- 
trusted vith some administrative responsibilities. The new "peoples 
denocratic” administration would then grant complete freedom of speech, 
assembly, writing and religion so long as these freedoms are not used 

a a political instrument. The new regime plans to nationalize monopolis= 
tie concerns and foreign tradée and undertake a "broad program of 
Andustrialization without the aid of Anglo-American "expansionists." 
Workers are promised euch privileges ae reduced hours, the right to strike 
and old age pensions while peasants are promised the abolition of in=- 
dsbtedness and usurious interest rates, as well as redistribution of land 
on the basis of family size ami quality of thé Land. 

In the field of foreign policy, the new Governnent wilt ganas 
all foreign debts, expropriate all foreign capital, abrogate the Anglo~ 
Burmese Treaty and any others "signed against the interest of the nation" 
end wage a continuous struggle ageinst Anglo-American "expansionism," 

It will not accept assistance that would affect adversely Burma's political, 
nen 


SE 
Approved For Release 2000/08/29 : LIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


Approved For Release 2000/08/28 #0? 79-01082A000100030008-9 


@conomic or military interests, but would be willing to establish frienay 

relations with any country on a "reciprocal and equal” basis. Howaver, 

at will negotiate freely with other "Peoples! Democratic" States in the 

| interest of "world peace," 

. 4 interest alao is the BCP's attitude towards the more conser= 
vative and backward ethnic minorities, partlewlarly the Xarens,. The POF 

nanifasto states that, ‘although the feudal. eystems of the 112 people 

most be replaced with a "peoples" administration, these people are entitled 

%0 equal. rights with all other peoples in Burma, including those of mto- 

mony and osBsiOne The Karen rebellion is attributed to imperialist 

nethinations, the absence of “peal” independance and "reactionary, land 

lord domination" of the Karen National Unions Therefore, the PDF 4s 

charged with "smashing" the Karen rebelLion while the Karan "masses! 

are dalled upon to tepudiate theix Leaders and join the Burman ‘gapees® 

fn order to shape their om destiny along "dems cratic” principles. 

While BCP intentions for domination of Burma are clear, their 
realization has hardly progressed past the earliest stages, The ooator~ 
ence ‘at which the POF wae founded wes. marked by a considerable divergence 
of ‘viewpoints. Bo Po Kin, the titvlar leader of the PYO who was ‘later 
reported failed by the FOF, favored reathing a settlement with the 
Goveimment but was opposed by Than Tun. On the other hand, Than Tum 
opposéd an accomodation with the Karens, while, at least, ‘one other 
Leader is reported to have advocated cooperation The PRO subsequently 
is reported to have held a meoting of its om for the purpose of developing 
a wmified polloy and preventing further fragmentation of the organisa= 

15 


| SE . 
Approved For Release 2000/08/46": CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


Approved For Release 2000/08/29SmeateRPPY 9-01082A000100030008-9 


7 tion. Furthermore, there are indications of growing suspicion of the 
‘Communists within the PDF as well as the development of personal jealousies. 
‘Nevertheless, the BCP has succeeded, temporarily at least, in forming a 
popular front dominated by Than Tun and may now make efforts gradually to 
amalgamate those fragments still operating independently. Moreover, it 
‘is in a better position to remove the possibility of an effective 
rapprochement between the Government and the PYO. As a eoeaie: Com munist 
capabilities in Burma have been apreciably enhanced and, unless undermined — 
by internal dissension, stend a good chance of becoming even more 
formidable. 

‘Foreign Contacts 

- The BCP is known to have been in contact with the Communist Party 
of India and probably still is. Although the channels of communications 
are not known, liaison is probably maintained through Indian Conmmiiats 
resident in Burma and those arriving by land, air or sea routes. Ona 
few occasions, notably the 195 Commonwealth Commmist Conference in 
London and the conference sponsored by the Vorld Federation of Democratic 
Youth in Calcutta in 1948, BCP representatives had the opportunity to meet 
Communist groups from several other countries, including the USSR. 
Although there is no conclusive evidence of direct liaison between the 
BCP and Chinese Communists, extensive liaison, relatively safe from de- 
tection, could exist and there are indications that it does. Such 
diaison is facilitated by the absence of adequate border security measures. 


The BCP's incorporation of significant portions of the Chinese program 


inte its own has already been noted. Moreover, the man who is reported 
16 


Approved For Release 2000/08/2 IA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


: ' Ss —e FT 


sinte see hestakint tina en dade alae ibaa tae 98 


Approved For Release 2000/08/23" etree 9-01082A000100030008-9 


to be the Secretary—General of the Burma branch of the China Democratic 
League is suspected of being a contact man between Burnese and Chinese 
Communists. He is said to have been on friendly terms with the president 
of the Peoples’ Democratic Youth League and to have attended the Cal~ 
eutta conference and, in the company of another Chinese, the BCP 
conference when it adopted the program of violence. 

There have also been a few cases in which Chinese have been 
arrested under suspicious circumstances and may have been involved in 
liaison activity. Finally, the China News Agency has reported the 
signing, in Burma, of a mutual assistance agreement between the Chinese 
and Burmese Commmist Parties. Although such an event devbane highly 
improbable, it is by no means impossible. 

No direct contacts with Soviets or the USSR have ever been proved, 
although recent unevaluated rumors emanating from Thailand charge the 
Soviet Legation there with purchasing arms and ammunition in the black 
market and smuggling them to the Burmese Communists. However, until 
more positive evidence is available, it should be assumed that BCP 
relations with the USSR are tenuous and indirect. 

The extent of foreign control over the BCP is still an unresolved 
question. Strong forsign influence is discernable in its propaganda and 
in its growing compliance to orthodox Communist doctrine and use of 
violence. Although Than Tun has denied the charge of foreign control, hs 
has publicly stated that "The peoples of the world's fight under the 


leadership of Soviet Russia is allied to the same struggle in Burma" 


and that there were many Indians and Chinese in the BCP some of whom had 
17 


* s 


Approved For Release 2000/08/2 IA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


(C—O a 


i 
i 
| 
| 
| 
| 
i 


Approved For Release 2000/08/235=@tieiaGhP 7 9-01082A000100030008-9 


Nelected” leaders by the masses. The BCP therefore has deononstrated 
its amenability to foreign "advice," ‘at least on a policy level, and it 
would probably accept material assistance with alacrity. However, it 
is entirely possible that the Communist movement in Burma would be 
seriously retarded in the event of large-scale and overt foreign inter— 
werition in the implementation of policy. 


18 


Approved For Release 2000/08/29 : CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


Approved For Release 2000/0 678@==@iefe® P7 9-01082A000100030008-9 | 


COMMUNIST PARTY (BURMA) 


The CPB appears. to have degenerated from a fairly formidable organi- 
gation into numerous uncoordinated anarchist and bandit gangs operating with- 
out principles or clearcut objectives. This loess of cohesiveness may be 
largely due to the long incarceration of its leader, Thankin Soe, and may be 
rectified somewhat when, and if, he is freed from reported imprisonment by 
the PDF, In terms of members, popular support and insurrectionary potential 
the CPB is considerably weaker than the BCP. «Although the CPB has been re~ 
sponsible for some of the disturbances in central and southern Burma, it has 
been most active in the Arakan, which forms the western coastal area of Burma. 
However, even as regards the Arakan, it is questionable as to how much of the 
unrest can be attributed to the CPB, to srakanese separatists, or to both. 

The CPB's policies, if any actually exist, are at best vague generalizations 
having much in common with all other Burman political parties. Militarily, 
the CPB violently opposes the Government, the PVO and the BCP which latter is 
considered to be opportunistic and compromising. Although the CPB advocates 
cooperating with the Karens, it appears to have had little, if any, suocess. 
Sq far as is known the CPB does ant maintain any foreign contacts. All things 
considered, the CPB is considered a dangerous organization capable of numerous 
activities and of prolonging the general tiene in Burma, but not of unseat- 
ing the Government. 

CHINESE Cu.nUNIST ACTIVITY 

Stimilated by postwar developments in China, intensified Communist 
activity among the estimated 250-300,000 Chinese in Burma, most of whom have 
close personal and sentimental ties with China, has made considerable headway o 


Kuomintang influence has drastically declined and ite efforts to combat the 


-19~ 
Approved For Release 2000/08/29 © =hyP79-01082A000100030008-9 


1 RR Hea 


ae = Me 


asi eal Sk si evi ARCS dort in A PA tah cme etn eae et me ng 


Approved For Release 2000/08 9S CIS MDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


_pread of Commmisnm have become increasingly weak and ineffectual. The main 


oanters of Chinese Commas st activity appear to be Rangoon, Mandalay and along 
the Tunnap-Burma border. Tn Rangoon, where the Chinese Commmists are said 

to maintain their headquarters, there are several well~financed party organizers, 
some of whom recently returned to China presumably for instructions, Of the 
$0,000 Chinese in Rangoon, there are estimated to be 3,000 party members or 
active supporters, and most of the renainter aré suspected of being at least 
opportunistioally or passively sympathetic to the Chinese Communist movement. 
dnother indication of growing Conmmist influence among the Chinese is that 


-@11 Chinese publications in Rangoon, with the exception of the one Kuonintang 


paper, Which has steadily lost circulation, have taken » pro-Commnist stand, 
st least insofar as China is concerned, Limited information indicates that 
Chinese Communi st activity in Upper Burma is directed from Mandalay, but in 
view of the highly disturbed conditions that have recently obtained in that 
area this may no longer by the sase. Nevertheless, they are apparently still 
active, and making a pertioular effort to recruit new adherents among the 
resident Chinese Nationalist eacrtaxs ae refugecs drifting down from Yunnane 
Also, there have been several Chinese inoursions along the Sino-Burmess border, 
aome reportedly Commmist, which meither the Burmese Government or local leaders 
have been able adequately to contain, 
The Chinese Commmists, however, have tried to minimize their overt 
activities, leaving such to its front organization, the China Democratic 
League (CDL), CDL publications are completely pro-Communist in orientation, 
and the COL is suspected not only of being in contact with Burmese Communists, 
but also of operating a secret radio in Rangoon and facilitating the infiltration 
~ 20m 
SEC 
Approved For Release 2000/0 : CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


S 


Approved For Release 2000/0Sa@am@itei¥®) P79-01082A000100030008-9 

of Chinese Comamists into Burmae Moreover, it reputedly maintains amicable 
relations with U Ba Swe, the extreme leftist chairman of the Burma Socialist 
Party (BSP), and may have been partly responsible for the recent Socialist 
manifesto which praised the Chinese Commmist, denounced Anglo-American “im- 
perialism,” and claimed that the Socialists were the true adherents of Marxism 
in Burma. «A CDL newspaper also published a statement by Ba Swe in which he 
reiteratcd admiration for the Chinese Communists and accused the anglo-Americans 
of instigating the long-standing Sino-Burmese border problem and of attempting 
to make a Tito of Mao Tse-tung. 

From the evidence at hand, it is believed that Chinese Communist policy 
towards Burma is only in the earliest stages of development. The primary ob- 
jective would seem to be the consolidation of the Chinese population in Burma 
under firm Communist control and later its use as an effective instrument of 
Chinese Commmist foreign policy. A second objective seems aimed at allaying 
Burmese fears of Chinese domination and the creation of sympathy for the Chinese 
movements The third, and final objective, naturally, is Commmist control of 
Burma, perhaps preferably under the aegis of China. Such objectives may 
explain the Chinese Communists’ avoidance of becoming involved in Burmese affairs 
and their concentration upon the resident Chinese. At the same time, the 
Chinese Commmists are free to deal with the Burmese Communists, while the 
"separate and distinot" CDL can approach other political elements, including 
those supporting the Government, without alienating potential supporters on 
either sides In this latter respect, it is significant to note that of all the 
Governments of Southern Asia, the Burmese Government is the only one the Chinese 


Communists have not denounced. 


Approved For Release 2000 : CIA-FRDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


Approved For Release 2000/0823 @t8® P 7 9-01082A000100030008-9 


It therefore appears that the Chinese Communists are attompting to take 
advantage of the general leftist tendencies of the various Burmese factions 
and to curry favor wherever the opportunity presents itself in the hope of the 
emergence, perhaps under Chinese guidance, of a popular front in support of a 
Government favorably disposed towards a Communist China. It is possible, how~ 
ever, that they are seeking to split the Socialist Party in order to weaken 
further the present Government to the advantage of the Burmese Commmnists. 
GOVERNMENT COUNTERMEASURES 

The Burmese Government is similtaneously attempting to suppress Communism 
by force and to advance a social and political program designed to undermine 
the appeal of Communism. These efforts, however, have been largely unsuccess- 
ful as the Government has been continually plagued by numerous seemingly 
insurmountable ohetaaies: some of which are of its own making. 

“hile CPB has been cutlawed, the BCP has not, and no action whatever 
has been taken against Chinese Communists in Burma. The Government, however, 
possesses rather extensive lesal powers which it has utilized ageinst all real, 
or imagined, insurgents. Under a Public Order Treservation Order, individuals 
may be arrested and held without trial indefinitsly. The Burmese President has 
the power (which is exercised only on the Government's advice) to declare martial 
law anywhere in the country. The President also has the power, under a Consti- 
tutional Remedies Suspension Order, to suspend such constitutional provisions 


as those relating to habeas corpus, writ of mandamus, prohibition and quo 


warranto. Although the circumstances unquestionably call for stringent measures, 


the lack of uniformity and irresponsibility that has often marked their appli~ 


cation have probably negated much of the salutary effect they otherwise might 


have had. 


Approved For Release 2000/087 -RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


WY 


Approved For Release 2000/08 2o"=@"#2@D P79-01082A000100030008-9 


Militarily, the Government's armed forces are superior to those of the 
Comminists in terms of manpower and materiel, but are, nevertheless, severely 
handicapped in a number of respects. ‘The most important is the wide dispersion 
of these forces throughout the country to fight a variety of insurgents, in 
addition to the Commmists. Government forces have to contend with difficult 
terrain and unorthodox military tactics without the benefits of efficient 
transportation and communication systems. Almost all military supolies must 
be imported, and these are limited by a depleted Treasury. Karen and PVO 


defections reduced Army and Military Police strength by at least 20%, enteiled 


eee ee 


a considerable loss of materiel and generally lowered the efficiency and effective- 
ness. of Burma's military forces while enhancing the capabilities of anti- 
Government Poréeae Burmese military forces suffer from inexperience, and are 
woefully short of technical, organizational and leadership personnel. Othor 
wealnesses are politics, nepotism, praft and corruption. Many Burmans in the 
armed forces retain sympathies with the PVO's and Commmists which has rendered 
them unreliable in many instances. In addition, the Government, inspired by 
the Socialists, hag raised an estirwted 22,000 police levies to supplement 

the regular military forces. Although the levies have since been placed wider 
army or military police administration, they are regarded by many observers 

as a private organ of the %ocialist Party. They are poorly trained and ill- 
disciplined, have not particularly distinguished themselves in the field, and 
their future effectiveness and loyalty is open to question. Finally, high 
Burmese military authorities are extremely susp icious of the British Wilitery 
Mission, whose chief function is to rectify just such deficiencies, and have 
increasingly disregarded its advice and ignored its offers of assistance. Ag 


DZ 


Approved For Release 2000/ « CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


Approved For Release 2000/08f2S CRED P79-01082A000100030008-9 


a result, Burmese military forces have not been able to suppress the Commmists, 


much less all the other insurgents, and are pressed to maintain control of 
the towns they garrison and the lines of communication between them. 
Politically, the Burmese Government has made several efforts, including 
the offer of a generous amesty, to settle the Commmist insurrection by 
negotiation. The Commnists, however, never gave indication of acceptingo 
Basic government policies parallel those advocated by the Communists 
under a higher standard of living in most respects. The government promises 
the Burmese veople political freedom, economic security, and a socialized wel- 
fare state through the redistribution of land, industrialization, state control 
of the means of production and equitable distribution of surplus wealth. Such 
& program has undoubtedly stolen thunder from the Communists, especially since 
it offers the Burmese the same advantages without bloodshed, as well as pro- 
viding frecdom from foreign domination and exploitation. By the same token, 
the Government is still seeking a rapprochement with the PVO through their 
common “leftism," in order better to isolate the Communists as well as to re~ 
duce overall insurgent strength. However, its inability to usher in a utopia 
immediately after independence has benefited the Communists who blame the 
Government for the ills "resulting from connivance with imperialists.” Al- 
though the Government launched its program with much enthusiasm, the resources 
and qualified personnel were not available to carry forward successfully such 
a far-reaching program on such a broad fronts Furthermore, good intentions 
were too often marred by malfeasance in high office. In other cases, hasty 
and ill-considered action, such as the nationalization of the Irrawaddy 
Flotills Company, has resulted in additional financial burden. Finally, the 
Governnent has been forced to divert more and more of its limited resources 


to uxproductive military expenditures, 


Approved For Release 2000/08/29-2 9-01082A000100030008-9 
RET 


| Approved For Release 2000/08P29™*StfSBP 7 9-01082A000100030008-9 


les 


Recently, the Burmese Government appears to have become increasingly 
aware of its inability to promote peace and prosperity through its own efforts. 
Its policies have noticeably shifted from the extreme left towards the center. 
It has sought and received military assistance from the Commonwealth, but re- 
jected an offer of short-term financial aid on the grounds that the conditions 
were too restrictive. It has sponsored legislation designed to attract, rather 
than discourage, the introduction of foreign capital for the development of 
mineral resources, and has showm interest in the fourth point of the Presi- 
dent's inaugural address. It has concurred in the US sugzestion for a common 
front policy regarding the recognition of a Chinese Communist Government. The 
Prime Minister has recommended the negotiation of mutually beneficial treaties 
with nations having "common interests", and most recently the Foreign Minister 
stated that Burma probably would "consider favorably" any suggestions for a 
Pacific blocs Socialistreaction has been one of reluctant asquiescence, and 
since the Socialists are the Government's chief supporters they could precipi- 
tate a serious political crisis at any time. ‘ithdrawal of their support could 
mean the Government's resignation, a split in the Socialist Party, or both. 
Although such developments are entirely possible, it se-ms likely that the 
parities concerned realize the disastrous consequences that are likely to be 
the rosult, and will attempt to avoid them at least temporarily. Furthermore, 
the Government's changing attitude does not mean that is has sandoned ite 
Merxist coloration, but that it is probably motivated by reasons of self- 
preservation, Nevertheless, the new trend is an indication that Burmese leaders 
are at last discovering the real threat to their independence and arc turning 
in the only direction from which assistance is possible in maintaining that 


| oe 


SE . 
Approved For Release 2000/ : CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


neiaitets 


Approved For Release 2000/08#*™@729RDP7 9-01082A000100030008-9 


independence and restoring stability in Burma. 


CONCLUSIONS AND PROSPECTS 


Although a relatively small minority, Burmese Communists are making 
a violent efYort to overthrow the existing regime and establish their ow 
administration over all of Burmas ‘hile both Commmist parties are effective~- 
ly serving Soviet foreign policy, the BCP is considerably the stronger and 
more advanced in ideological sophistication. Tho BCP has demonstrated its 
Willingness to conform to the international Commmist policy and its ability 
to execute instructions emanating from foreign sources. It will probably con- 
tinue to do both at least as long as foreign control is relatively well-con- 
cealed and local control left largely in the handa of indigenous Commmists. 
Although the BCP's organization is imperfect and Shere is always the possibility 
of internal factionalism, it is still capable of prolonged violence and of 
implementing its more immediate cbjectivese It will constitute a continuing 
threat to Burmese stability, but it is unlikely to overthrow the Goverment 
in the immediate future through its own efforts. However, it is entirely 
possible that its capabilities willbe enhanced as the Chinese Commmists con- 
solidate their control of China. As thie ocours, it would seen logical that 
its orientation will gradually shift away from India towards Chinas 

Meanwhile, although the present Gunes is anti-Commmist and will 
probably continue its efforts to suppress Communist activities, it is politically 
and economically weak and unstablee It is forced to dissipate its military 
strength against a variety of adversaries, and is subject to the fissiparous 
tendencies of its supporters. Therefore, Commmism in Burma will not be 
suppressed in the predictable future. Such an cventuality will depend largely 

~26~ | 


SEC ! 
Approved For Release 2000/08/2Se*UIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


ee a 


ec oa ce rn 
Ge ae 


Approved For Release 2000/08/28, © P79-01082A000100030008-9 


upon @ much greater clarifioution of the lines dividing pro-and anti-Commmists. 
To achieve these ends, the government must considerably intensify its efforts 
to establish itself in the minds of the Burmese as the true advocate of 
nationalism and of better conditions in Burma while identifying the Commnists 
as the proponents of violence, acting under foreign instructions. In addie« 
tion, some kind of negotiated settlement will have to be reached with other 
insurgents and greater confidence and assistance obtained from the various hill 
people who heretofore have generally been suspicious of the Burmese Government 
in Rangoon. ‘hese efforts must be undertaken by the Burmese themselves, and 
the prospects for their fulfillment are not especially bright. Paradoxically, 
the Government is likely to become increasingly dependent upon ‘estern support 
and assistance, but its willingness and ability to resist Communism may be 
measured in direct ratio to the encouragement received from this source. Efforts 
to obtain such aid without exposing itself to charges of subservience to 
foreign interests will be a delicate procedure. ‘hile Western assistance would 
undoubtedly inerease the Burmese Government" 5 ability and willingness to resist 
Commmism, it cannot of itself provide a permanent solution to Burma's problems 
and restore stability under a non-Com-unist rogime. 

All things considered, the Burmese Government's position vis-a-vis the 
Communists is not hopeless, but the time in which to achieve a decisive position 


is decidedly limited. 


“276 


5 = 


Approved For Release 2 29 : CIA-RDP79-01082A000100030008-9 


i 
{ 


