wi 
COUNTRY 
SUBJECT 
PLACE 
ACQUIRED 
DATE OF IN 


-00457R0027001 


CD NO. 25X1A2g 


DATE DISTR, 11 May 1949 - 


Democratio Women's Congress : : . “@ 
25X1A6a “OUHDRANY, = NO.OF ENCLS. 1° V 
: F {LISTED BELOW) : 


ee 
, ) — in 8 . 5 25X1X6 


Preparations for the All=Chin@’” (0°00 NO. OF PAGES 3 
0 | 


REPORT NO... 


The Preparatory Committes for the establishment of the All-~China Faderation 
of Democratic Women (ACFDW) was formed on 12 January 1949. This committee, 
which consista cf -75 members. is a combination of the 49 members of the 
Preparatory Committee of the China Liberated Areas Women's pede raion * 
(CLAWF) (Chieh Fang Ch’u Fu Nu Lien Ho iui - Ae ok & Ap ko Hit Ger) and 
24 other members who are either “democratic” women invited by. the Preparatory 
Committee of the CLAWF or are leaders in the China Women’s Association (CHA) 
(Chung Kuo Fu su Lien I Hui - re Ol uh <tc A 2 AB) and its branches and 
sister organs located chiefly in Kuomintang ‘controlled areas. 


The Preparatory Comnittes of the CLAWF is the authoritative organ which 
controls all women's federations in Conmmunist-controlled areas, including 
the Shensi-Kansu-Ninghsia Border Area Women's Federation, the Shansi- 
Suiyuan Liberated Area Women's ‘ederation, the East China Liberated Area 
Women's Federation, the North China Liberated Area Women's Federation, the 
Central Plains Liberated Area Women's Federation, and the Northeast 
Liberated Area Women's Federation, Among the above Area Faderationa, the 
Shensi-Kansu-singhsia Border Arem Women’s Federation, organized about 1939, 
was the first "democratic" women's federation established in China. The 
Preparatory Committee of the CLAWF consists of the key personnel who lead 
and control the various Liberated Area women's federations .+** 


The CHA was established in Chungking in 1943, with LI Te--chuan, wife of 
General FENG Yu-hsiang, as chairman. Branch associations were established 
later in Chengtu and <unmming, After the surrender of the Japanese in 1945, 
the main offices of the association were moved to Shanghai. Shortly after 
the move, the Peiping and Nanking branchas were established, followed by 
the opening of the Hong Kong-Aowloon branch in 1946. The main offices in 
Shanghai and the various branch offices were known to the public officially 
as organs established "only for the promotion of women's welfare and 
therefore without party background or affiliation.” Actually the several 
branches and the Shanghai headquarters were led by underground women 
Communists, members of the China Democratic “eague, and other leftists who 
cooperated with the CLAWF and secretly accepted the direction of TSAI Chang, 
TENG Ying-chao and other key members of the Preparatory Comittee of CLAWF. 


‘mene sarc 5 alee 
Bist TPUTION 


ae hi [ Pape be 
_ eae al ee a pe eee el 


Document No, 662 / 
NO CHANGE in 


Approved For Release 2001/03/22 : CIA-RDP82- oder REeOS DOH EB 7B — IO 


é Ts s 
A Memo, 4 Apr 77 


Approved For Release 2001/03/22 : CIA-RDP82-00457R002700170002-6 


oe | CONFIDENTIAL 25X1A2g 


PLIDENTTA 


CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY aa 


aA a 7 


if 


The Standing Committee of the Preparatory Committee for the Establishment 
of the ACFDVY was also formed on 12 January 1949. It has 21 mombers, 13 
of whom are concurrently members of the Standing Cosmittee of the 
Preparatory Comittes of the CLANF, The other eight members were chosen 
from among the KT~controlled area members of the Preparatory Committee 


for the Bsteablishment of the AGFDS 


5, The Standing Committee of the Preparatory Comaittee for the Establishment 
of the ACFDW held its first meeting on 12 January 1949, probably in 
Shiheniachuang, with approximately 50 womea attending. Among the members 
of the Standing Committee presen’ at this meeting were: TENG Ying~chao, 
KANG Ko-ching, SHEN Tau-chiu, LO Chiung, CHOU Ying, CHANG Yu- fon , 

SUN Wen-shu, CHAO Feng, PAI Hsi, and TENG Ko-ming. Some of the mambers 
of the Preparatory Committee astended the meeting of the Standing : 
Comittee, including YANG Kang, LIU Ching-yang, JUAN Yuouenua, YANG Yun 
and CHANG Man-yun. TSAI Chang was unable to attend this moeting because 
sha was busy with the Budapest Congress of the World Federation of 
Democratic Women.**** In her absence TENG Ying-chao was made chairman 
of the meoting, being second to TSAL jn the hierarchy of Chinese 
Communist women. in her address to the meeting, TENG stressed the point 
that the immediate major mission of “democratic” women in China was the 
convening of the first All-Cnina Democratic Women's Congress {ACDIC). 
Tne following officers of the Preparatery Committees were elected: 


Chairman : TSAI Chang 
Vice Chairmen : TENG Ying-chao 


LI Tee chuan 
Secreta ry~-uensral ; CHANG Chin-chiu 
Assistant Secreta ries-General: SUN Wen-shu 
: ‘TSENG Haien-chih 


fhe Following were named chairmen of the three comnittees of the Preparatory 
Commi tte : 


TENG Ying-chse, chairman of the Committees for Drafting Congress Reports 
(fe Hui Pao Kao Ch'i Ts'ao #ei Yuan Hui - KP Ae RE, # Fs Qe ) sere 


‘SHEN Tzu-chiu, chairman of the Committeo for Drafting Regulations , 
Governing the ACFDW ( Ch‘ van Kuo Min Chu Fa Nu Lien Ho Hui Chang Ch’eng 

rE WRCWo asciee: wis. {f qe. 42 7c BA 4 & 2 ae ee BE : 

Ch'i fs'ao Wei Yuan Hui ~- (@ AAS hig K Ie & “= 4g AS E Le Ve, 


LO Chiung, chairman of the Publicity Committes (Hguvan Ch'uan Wei Yuan 
a 2a. ar , 


i ee Soures prepared this report with the assistance of 
25X1A s Chinese former university administrator, on the besis of information 


from (a) an elderly Chinese educator who formerly taught in a Shanghai 
university, (b) a liberal American-educatsd Chinese professor in 
Canton who has access to certain publications restricted to CCP and 
Democratic League members, and {¢) Communist publications in Bong Kong, 
including the Hua Shang Pee. 


ok Reported as the Federation of Women's Unions of the Liberated Areas 
29X1A 
a ESE Biographical information on ersomel of the Preparatory Committee 
of the ACFDW 
25X1A 


cone fina 


CONFIDENTIAL 


Approved For Release 2001/03/22 : CIA-RDP82-00457R002700170002-6 


pepe SERN EEN NORE TTPO 


eel 


a 


rere" 


settee SEO SETI PY TE NPS FAYE MENT TE | 


arrmneray eo 


eT 


Approved For Release 2016S DP82-00457R00270 
Ri CTED 


CENTRAL INTELIIGENCE AGENCY 
ATTACHMENT T 


This attechment consists of the translation of an article from the 18 January 
1949 issue of the Ilua Shang Pao. Chinese Communist Chinese~ianguage daily ia 


Hong Kong. 


The Preparatory Work for the Convocation of the First All-~China Democratic 


Women's Congresa (ACDWC) - Bulletin Lasued the Preparatory Committee for 
the Establishment of the Ali-China Federation of Democratic Women \ACKDN). 


“2. The duties of the first ACDWC ere: : 


to decide on the guiding plan and duties of the All-China Women's 
ovement, 

to establish the ACFDW, 

to pass the regulations governing the ACFDW, and 

to elect the Exeoutive Comnittee of the ACFDW.* 


The ACDWC should summon al] women in China to atruggle for the speedy 
destruction of the reactionary Kuomintang regime, for chasing American 
imperialism out of China, and for the establishment of a People’s Democratic 
Republic. 


2, The fixed number and distribution of delegates to the ACDWC: The total 
number of delegates shall bo 360. The distribution, which is based on the 
number of woren in each locality, the organization and working foundation, 
transportation and other conditions, is as fcllows: 


a. 255 delegates from the Liberated areas: 
70 from the North China Liberated Area 
30 from the Northwest Liberated Area 
55 from the East China Liberated Araa 
60 from the Northeast Liberated Ares 
30 from the Central Plains Liberated Area 
10 from the South China Liberated Area 


b. Approximately one hundred delegates from the Auomintang-controlied arsas. 


c. Each area shall elect as reserve delegates ons tenth of the total number 
of delegates scheduled to attend the ACDWC from that aroa. 


3. The qualifications and constituents+* of the delegates to the ACDWC: 
Regardiess of class, race, vocation, education, work experience and religion, 
any woman can be elected a delegate te the ACDHC who is against the reactionary 
Kuomintang regime, is against feudalism, is against the American imperialistic 
invasioa of China, agrees to racial indepondence and jand reform, supports the 
principles of New Democracy, favors women's liberation ani equality between men 
and woman, and is 18 years of age cr older. The constituents should include 
the following: women laborers; rural laboring women; women atudents; women 
employees who are engaged in cultural, educational, artistio, nursing, medical, 
economic, finance and other work; women "free professionals"; women workers 
in the People’s Government, in people's organs and in the People’s Liberation 
Army; women of "special technique"; women of minority races; overseas 
Chinese women; and women members from the families of soldiers of the People’s 
Liberation Army. 


Approved For Release 2001 RES PRTAK ED Ps 2-00457R002700170002-6 


2 


Approved For Release 200 fbS ER LGipepPs2-00457R002 
RES CTED 


CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 


ATTACHWENT I 
~2*s 


4, Method of slecting delegates to the first ACDWC: 


a. Delegates from the Liberated Areas shall be elected by means of slections 
On two levels, i.e.. the women's organizations of each hsien shall call a 
Hsien fomen's Representatives’ Meeting at which the hsien representatives 
Shall be elected to attend the Liberated Area fomen's Representatives’ 
mectiag; at the Liberated Area Women's “spresentatives' lieeting, the 
delegates to the ACDWC will be elected. 


b, The delegates to the ACDWC from the Auomintang-controlled areas shall bs 
slected by the following method:*** 


ce, All affaire concerning the election of delegates must be completed before 
15 February 1949, A report should be sent to the Preparatory Comittee 
explaining how the elections took place, the results of the elections and 
the namo list as well asa the biography of each delegate. 


5, The Democratic Women's “ederation of each Liberated Area should proceed 
with tho following two items of preparatory work: 


a. Proposals of each Liberated Area to the ACDWC shall be submitted to the 
Women's Bspresentatives’ Conference of each respective Liberated Area for 
examination end putting in order prior to the submiasion of these 
proposals to the ACDIC. 


b. Where possible, collections shall be made of pictures showing women’s . 
activities in each Liberated Area, samples of women's production in each 
Liberated Area, and of anything good for exhibition; ‘these will all be 
mada ready for presentation, 


6. The time and place for the convocation of the first ACDWC will be 
anncunced separately. 


5X1A TE Connent. Overt sources have announced the first meeting of 
the Executive Committee of the ACFDW in Peiping, 15 April 1949. 


baal Comment. “Constituent” as used here may be used in the sense 
25X1A_ of component, referring to the delegations; it may a1s0 mean the body 
of slectore who choose the delegates. 


25xix" WE Comment. For obvious reasons, this section was left blank in the 
original article. 


RESTIYTED 


Approved For Release 200 RESTRIC BEDS ps2-00457R002700170002-6 


Approved For Release 2001/03/22 : CIA-RDP82-00457R00278Q4 AGQ02-6 


CENTRAL INTELLIGEMCE AGENCY 


we 


25X1A2g 


ARR po 


von ER coment. 4s a rule, the resolutions and reports of any kind 
at a Chinese Communist Congress sre a combination of the reports made 


~«f 
25X1A6a 
25X1A 
Enel: 


by a few key personnel of the Preparatory Committee, which has 
prepared and decided oa everything for the Congress in advances; an 


axample of this pattern is to be aeen in the Sixth All-Chiaa Labor 
Congress, a The Committee for Drafting Congress 
Reports is therefore the organ for deciding on resolutions for the 
ACDWC: hence TENG Ying-chao’s position in the Preparatory Committee , 
as well as her pesition in the future ACDYC, is of no less importance 


than that of forwar Comintern member TSAI Chang. 


Translation from Hua Shang Pao. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


CONFIDENTIAL 


Approved For Release 2001/03/22 : CIA-RDP82-00457R002700170002-6 


niet pepsi ans meeps parang 


