The Ambassador in China (Stuart) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/5–2047: Telegram
 
[Document 104]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Stuart
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Nanking
, May 20, 1947.
[Received May 20—1:20 p.m.]
 
 
1100. In move to bring under some semblance of control the 2-weeks-old series of rice and student demonstrations and disorders, Government on May 18 promulgated a series of decrees forbidding public mass demonstrations and setting up channels for the presentation of grievances. Coincidentally, the Gimo
99a
 issued a statement calling for discipline and the application of the processes of law (see Embtels 
1089 and 1086 of May 19
1
 ). Background and development of this mounting crisis appear to be as follows:
 
As already reported in previous telegrams, the first outbreaks were looting of rice shops in areas as widespread as Shanghai and Chengtu but predominantly in lower Yangtze Valley. These outbreaks closely followed a spectacular increase in the price of rice with the merchants refusing to sell accumulated stocks. In self-defense the rice dealers then began to organize themselves. Effective action by the police has reduced the number of rice riots and held them under control.
 
In the meantime, unrest in the university has increased to such a point that practically every academic center in the country is on strike. The demands in the original university demonstrations were somewhat fanciful in that they comprised such things as protesting the elimination of a course on navigation in the curriculum of the Hangchow Christian College, protests against examinations which are now scheduled, and demands for removal of certain colleges from one city to another. As the demonstrations spread, demands become more basic; now they are principally for an increase of Government subsidies to students and immediate termination of the civil war.
 
Giving added weight to the current seriousness of student demands is that majority of sympathy among faculty members is with the students. The highlight in protests by professors came in the form of a manifesto issued by the faculty of the Government’s National Central University in Nanking which strongly condemns Government neglect of education, small appropriations, and attempts to control academic freedom of thought. The manifesto demands higher pay for teachers, larger appropriations for education and purchase of books and scientific instruments. It further warns that unless there is a drastic revision of basic policy, placing education on a more important level, the educational system of China is rapidly heading for disaster.
 
Demonstrations are estimated at between 3 and 10 thousand students each.
 
Leadership and motivation of the demonstrations have shown definite signs of changing. Most competent observers believe the original impetus was given by the CC clique
2
 which was desirous of inciting a series of disorders which would in time publicly discredit a Political Science group-dominated government by proving it incapable of maintaining order, and in the long run provide the justification for a strong-arm, right wing government coming into power either through a 
coup d’état
 or through sweeping the elections to be held this fall. All this has coincided with growing public agitation for a new 
peace movement. Aside from repeated demands for peace in the liberal and independent press, two outstanding examples are the request by three members of the People’s Political Council that Communist representatives be invited to attend the session which convenes on May 20, and a petition signed by 13 members of the Legislative Yuan that the Government forthwith offer new peace terms. With this kind of public backing it is now apparent that leadership in the disturbances organized by the CC clique is passing into the hands of the Democratic League and the Communists. This development can hardly be displeasing to the CC clique, which can now claim that lack of public order is attributable to their enemies. Just how much of the agitation is now under Communist leadership is debatable, but it must be assumed that the Communists are present and, if not already active, are prepared to exploit the situation should it become necessary or desirable.
 
Chang Chun’s government is facing an important test. Having banned demonstrations on May 18, several thousand Shanghai students on May 19 proceeded to disregard the order and demonstrate for peace. No measures were taken against them. On May 20, students in Nanking organized a demonstration to demand peace at the opening session of the PPC. The Government stationed troops around Nanking University to prevent movement in or out. Other university students, under the leadership of the National Central University, organized a movement to “liberate” their fellow students. They marched into the Nanking University, joined forces with students there and marched out. Again no action was taken by either police or soldiers beyond some blank rifle fire. As the students marched on the national assembly hall, where the PPC was meeting, they were confronted by barricades, fire hoses, and blackjacks which resulted in some disorder and a few injuries to students, as the PPC hastily adjourned for the morning.
 
Large bodies of students are still assembled in the vicinity of the national assembly hall confronting barricades manned by police and gendarmes. It remains to be seen What action the Government will take in face of this public flouting of its authority, but it is apparent that there is in train a student movement of considerable proportions which if not halted soon will tend to expand and contribute to further deterioration of the already parlous politico-economic situation.
 
 
 
Stuart
 
 
 
99a
 
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, President of the National Government of the Republic of China.
1
 
Neither printed.
2
 
Kuomintang group led by the two brothers, Chen Li-fu and Chen Kuo-fu.