The Ambassador in China (Stuart) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/5–2747: Telegram
 
[Document 121]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Stuart
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Nanking
, May 27, 1947—8 p.m. 
[Received 11:38 p.m.]
 
 
1156. Following is Shanghai’s 917 to Embassy, May 23, 6 p.m.: 
 
“Officer of Consulate General met Wang Hsin-heng, head of local secret police and was informed by him substantially as follows:
 
Present student agitation stems from time of so-called Peiping rape case
26
 at which time a nation-wide student organization was set up called Anti-American Atrocity Association in the formation of which the Communists were instrumental. This organization continued in existence and was later utilized by CC clique in an endeavor to cause embarrassment to newly reorganized Govt (Embtel 1065, May 16
27
 ). However, CC clique soon learned that they were unable to control it and that Communists were also using it to better advantage than were they; so they withdrew. The Communists soon learned that they also were unable to control it and they consequently have now also withdrawn. At present students appear to be without the control of any recognized dissident factions. They do not know what they want; after their demands are met they still are not satisfied.
 
Wang stated that at that moment the students were visiting shops and factories in Shanghai trying to induce workers to join them, realizing that without their support the students would be ineffectual. He stated that in this they would not succeed because of the relatively superior economic position of the workers. He said he had been able to convince the mayor and the commander of the garrison headquarters of the inadvisability of using force against students. He did not hazard an opinion as to solution of present student problem but appeared to think that moderation at present time was called for lest a more serious situation be created. Davis.”
 
 
 
 
Embassy’s own info indicates that both CC clique and Communists had hand in various, though different, demonstrations. It is possible that CC group has now completely withdrawn since it is plain that their efforts [give] advantage Communists more than themselves. However, we doubt withdrawal Communists’ activity and certainly not their influence. Most important outside instigating factor is probably Democratic League, which has strong influence not only with students but with many faculty members. Democratic Leaguers here told Arch Steele
28
 on May 23 they considered themselves prime moving force. However, student movement is believed based on general sentiment of dissatisfaction and while probably sparked and coordinated by Leftists has not been wholly captured by any one faction, although it may later become so.
 
 
 
Stuart
 
 
 
26
 
See pp. 1 
[
Pg. 1 is part of 
Doc. 1
]
 ff.
27
 
Not printed.
28
 
Correspondent of 
New York Herald Tribune
.