The Ambassador in China (Stuart) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/10–3147: Telegram
 
[Document 272]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Stuart
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Nanking
, October 31, 1947—11 a.m. 
[Received October 31—3:28 a.m.]
 
 
2169. Government pressure on Democratic League has noticeably eased during past 2 days probably as a result of Embassy’s expressed 
interest in matter (see final paragraph Embtel 2146, October 27). Although no arrests have been made, Democratic League leaders at Nanking continue under police surveillance.
 
Currently situation is briefly as follows: Announcement by Minister of Interior that Democratic League has been declared an illegal organization has not been followed by Executive Yuan decree ordering dissolution of League. In conversation with Lo Lung-chi and Hwang Yen-pei yesterday, the Prime Minister is stated by Lo to have said that he was reluctant to order dissolution of the League and that a directive from the League to its membership ordering cessation of all activities would be acceptable to the Government. League leaders state they are willing to issue such a directive if League members are not required to register with Garrison Commanders as persons connected with Communists, that their personal safety is guaranteed, and they are released from police surveillance. League leaders state they are also willing to relinquish Communist property, of which they are now custodians, to the Government.
 
Embassy considers that League leaders in Nanking and Shanghai are in no immediate danger, and that Government will take no further action against them pending clarification of American press reaction to original move. Safety of League members in provinces, however, is dubious and it is doubtful that Government has abandoned its effort finally to eliminate the League as an organization. In the meantime Embassy continues to be importuned by League leaders for protection against the Government. Thus far the Ambassador has pointed out to the Prime Minister, the Minister of the Interior, the Foreign Minister and the Generalissimo’s personal secretary the adverse publicity abroad and further alienation of internal opinion which the Government risks in following its present course, and, in the absence of specific instructions from the Department, will take no further action. In the circumstances however an expression of the Department’s views would be advantageous.
 
 
 
Stuart