The Consul General at Shanghai (Dams) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/11–747: Telegram
 
[Document 281]
 
The Consul General at Shanghai
 (
Dams
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Shanghai
, November 7, 1947.
[Received November 7—4:39 a.m.]
 
 
2589. Following summarizes announcement by Democratic League published November 6 in all local Chinese papers as Central News Agency release and also carried in front page column by 
Ta Kung Pao
.
 
While we have consistently maintained our stand for democratic peace and unity, intensification of war has made impossible our serving nation effectively.
 
Forced to discontinue activities as result of outlawing by Government, we sent Huang Yen-pei to Nanking as our negotiator and obtained Government’s offer following terms: League to dissolve voluntarily, Government properties loaned to League and CP properties in League’s custody to be taken over by Government, but League properties and private residences to be left undisturbed. Huang replied League would meet these terms but requested League be permitted to dispose of its own properties; League members be exempted from registering with Government and guaranteed civil liberties to which entitled; those arrested be tried according law and when held for alleged but unproven Communist affiliations they not receive treatment prescribed for Communists. To this Government replied if League formally declares voluntary dissolution and cessation activities, members can be exempted from registering and assured freedom within law. Individuals still engaging in illegal actions will be tried according law. Measures prescribed for treatment Communists will not be applied to Leaguers arrested and found not Communists or working for Communists. Points regarding properties will be carried out. Above is record of negotiations.
 
We hereby notify all League members to stop political activities as from today. All our General Headquarters personnel will resign in bloc and General Headquarters will dissolve as from today. Signed Chang Lan, Chairman Democratic League.
 
Full text being mailed.
48
 
 
Sent Department, repeated Nanking as 1748.
 
 
 
Davis
 
 
 
48
 
See 
United States Relations With China
, p. 834.