The Minister-Counselor of Embassy in China (Clark) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/12–847
 
[Document 304]
 
The Minister-Counselor of Embassy in China
 (
Clark
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
No. 1147
 
 
Nanking
, December 8, 1947.
[Received December 17.]
 
 
 
Sir
: I have the honor to enclose as of interest a copy of a memorandum of conversation between the Ambassador and Premier Chang 
Chun regarding the influence of the CC Clique from which it will be noted that Premier Chang Chun claims great credit for the Chen brothers for their early recognition of the Soviet menace.
 
It will be noted that Premier Chang is sanguine that when the new constitution is put into effect measures can and will be undertaken which ought to result in improvement of the situation.
 
Respectfully yours,
 
 
 
Lewis Clark
 
 
 
 
 
[Enclosure]
 
 
 
Memorandum by the Ambassador in China
 (
Stuart
) 
of a Conversation With the President of the Chinese Executive Yuan
 (
Chang
)
 
 
 
Nanking
, December 6, 1947.
 
 
I called on Premier Chang Chun with the thought of bringing to his attention some of the obstacles to American aid within the Chinese Government. I singled out two of these for which the CC Clique were generally regarded as responsible: (1) the increasing power of the CC Clique as seen in their control of most of the Government economic and financial institutions; (2) the intimidation of liberals through the irresponsible activities of the Party secret police giving the widespread impression both within China and abroad that there are no human rights as promised in the Constitution and as essential to real democracy, such as freedom of speech and publication.
 
He replied at length in an interesting historical and philosophical comment on the Kmt since its origin, its heritage and difficulties, with special reference to the place of the CC Clique as an almost inevitable feature of the process. After the break in 1927 between Chiang Kaishek and the group which remained loyal to the Soviet advisers Russia tried in various ways to hinder the progress toward national amity. It was then that the Chen brothers came into prominence as the skillful and determined opponents of Russian machinations. Chen Li-fu has remarked, quoting a phrase from Mencius, that those who are now denounced as reactionaries were the true prophets, the so-called liberals have only recently awakened to the Soviet menace, and the Democratic League has not yet made the discovery. These brothers are narrow and bigoted but their realization of the Communist danger and their courage in meeting it have not been without value to the national cause. As to the evils mentioned by me he and his colleagues are quite aware of these but the situation is now so critical that any attempt to correct them would precipitate internal disturbances which a tottering edifice could not stand. When the Constitution is put into effect measures can—and he is convinced will—be undertaken which ought to result in fairly rapid improvement. If the date fixed for 
this (December 25) cannot be kept he thinks that the delay will not be for long and that the subsequent procedure can be expedited so as to be concluded by about the middle of March. Meanwhile he would keep the matter in mind and try at least to avoid any further aggravations.
 
The conversation lasted for over an hour and a half and was perhaps worth-while.
 
 
J. L[
eighton
] S[
tuart
]