The Ambassador in China (Stuart) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/5–1547: Telegram
 
[Document 98]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Stuart
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Nanking
, May 15, 1947.
[Received May 15—4:05 a.m.]
 
 
1056. At weekly press conference held at the Ministry of Information on May 14 the director of the Chinese Government Information Office, Dr. Hollington Tong, replied as follows to questions presented:
 
1. Query: What is the Government’s official attitude to the Democratic League?
 
Answer: Together with the Chinese Communist Party, the Democratic League has openly repudiated the constitution and rejected the validity of the National Assembly. In spite of its close association with the Chinese Communist Party, which is now in open rebellion against the Government, the League still claims to be a peaceful political party. The Government’s attitude toward the Democratic League will be determined by the policies and activities it pursues.
 
2. Query: Will the League be allowed to run in the coming elections?
 
Answer: All citizens of the Republic of China may run in the coming elections according to law. The League, however, does not have the right to run as a party.
 
3. Query: How many political parties are there in China beside those in the PCC?
87
 
 
 
Answer: With the exception of political parties which have been active, the number of political groups is difficult to estimate.
 
4. Query: What is the Government’s attitude toward the peace movement which, according to press reports, might be launched by members of the PCC at next session of the People’s Political Council on May 22?
 
Answer: The Government has never shown reluctance to consider reasonable proposals by which unity may be peacefully achieved, but the Government has been much disillusioned by past experiences. It does not intend to be diverted from its course of unification and democratization by programs which have no substance behind them.
 
Dr. Tong then referred to a letter received on May 6 by the secretariat of the PPC which was sent by three PPC members, Hsu Teh-hing, Chow Ping-lia and Chien Tuen-sheng, in which they requested the Government to provide facilities for Communist members to attend the coming session scheduled to open May 20. The Secretary General of the PPC replied as follows: 
 
“Regarding the notice for Chinese Communist members of the People’s Political Council to attend the forthcoming meeting, we have by wire requested Mr. Wu Yun-fu, Chinese Communist staff member of CNRRA,
88
 to forward it. When a reply is received arrangements can readily be made, as you have kindly suggested, for you to go over and bring the Communist PPC members here by plane.
 
“However, judging from the attitude of the Chinese Communists towards the PPC during the past year and their turning down in January of this year General Chang Chih-chung’s
89
 proposed visit to Yenan, it is feared that their reaction this time may be none too favorable. It is also my apprehension that they may even ridicule the current proposition as another peace offensive missile.
 
“Personally, I am deeply impressed by your zest and farsightedness in making this offer to the Communists, and, as requested, I shall discuss the matter in detail with the Government. In the meantime, it is my hope that you will come to Nanking at an earlier date to avail us of your personal counsel.”
 
 
 
Dr. Tong then added that the secretariat has not received any peace proposals.
 
 
 
Stuart
 
 
 
87
 
People’s Consultative Council.
88
 
Chinese National Relief and Rehabilitation Administration.
89
 
Then Governor of Sinkiang.