The Ambassador in China (Stuart) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/8–1346: Telegram
 
[Document 13]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Stuart
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Nanking
, August 13, 1946—2 p.m. 
[Received August 14—1:20 a.m.]
 
 
1306. Initial editorial comment Nanking press on Marshall–Stuart statement
43
 generally expresses hope that US will not abandon efforts to obtain peaceful solution of China problem. General recognition that most serious obstacle to settlement is question of local Communist administration and integration armed forces.
 
Govt 
Chung Yang Jih Pao
 attributes failure Marshall–Stuart Mission to Communist separatist policy. Paper states “so long as Communists refuse to hand over their troops as well as civil administrations in the present Communist areas to the government there will be no settlement of the nation’s problems”. This paper suggests that statement may be forerunner of additional statement indicating a turn for the better in current situation.
 
Independent 
Hsin Min Pao
 expresses hope that work of mediation will not end with statement. Paper suggests that as Communist troops withdraw from specified areas, special teams composed representatives various political parties and groups proceed these areas to supervise popular elections of local governments. At same time Central Government is to be broadened to include representatives all parties and groups.
 
This paper remarks that statement reveals difficulty confronting mediators but not their opinion of the difficulty.
 
CC
44
 clique 
Ta Kung Pao
 accepts statement as final warning to entire Chinese nation and opposition of causes obstructing peaceful solution. Paper suggests that problems of local administration in areas evacuated by Communists be handled by political affairs commission to be established within Executive Headquarters. Paper advises Government show greater tolerance and allow those areas which Communists evacuate maintain administrative system somewhat different from that of central government areas until new 
arrangements can be decided upon after promulgation of a constitution. Same paper points out that mediators have support of entire Chinese people and resolutely urges them not to abandon their efforts.
 
Army 
Ho Ping Jih Pao
 attributes stalemate to lack of sincerity on part of Communists. Paper accuses Communists of dilatory tactics which permitted negotiations to rage on for months without concrete results.
 
Independent 
Ta Tao Pao
 expresses belief that hopes for peaceful settlement are slim. Paper quotes unconfirmed reports that General Marshall will return shortly to US to submit report on China situation and that Dr. Stuart will proceed Peiping transact unfinished business Yenching University; if these reports true, it is possible for situation deteriorate still further. Paper points out however that if both sides exercise forbearance for sake of nation, ways of peaceful settlement can still be explored and expresses hope that American mediators will continue labors for peace and unity in China. Same paper quotes spokesman of Communist Delegation to effect that no further concessions can be made by Communists.
 
Independent 
Hsin Min Wan Pao
 quotes Lo Lung-chi, spokesman of Democratic League, to effect that failure Marshall Mission was not unexpected and that time has come for America to reconsider her policy toward China and that if US insists on carrying out President Truman’s statement of December 15 civil war will be stopped. Lo Lung-chi reported to have added that US should be responsible for checking strife in China because portion of troops engaged in fighting equipped with American weapons and it is moral obligation on part of US to see that these weapons are not used for internal strife.
 
All comment reflects Chinese appreciation seriousness of situation, the smallness of the area of dispute and adopts position that problem is not insoluble. Although Government press holds Communists solely responsible for impasse, no accusations to date of Soviet–Chinese Communists ties and problem is considered as purely Chinese. No indications resentment of American intervention. In fact, some comment implies need for stronger American action in situation and Chinese chagrin that solution has not been found.
 
All papers at present speculating with regard to content Gimo’s statement promised for August 14 which, it is held, will have important bearing on present situation. Messages from Kuling published in local press refrained from comment on statement but reiterated previous announcements of Government determination to solve problem by political means and to pay close attention to economic situation.
 
 
 
Stuart
 
 
 
43
 
August 10, p. 1 
[
Pg. 1 is part of 
Doc. 1
]
.
44
 
The Chen brothers, Li-fu and Kuo-fu, prominent Kuomintang members.