Notes on Meeting Between General Marshall and General Yu Ta-wei at No. 5 Ning Hai Road, Nanking, October 10, 1946, 10:45 a.m.
 
Marshall Mission Files, Lot 54–D270
 
[Document 174]
 
Notes on Meeting Between General Marshall and General Yu Ta-wei at No. 5 Ning Hai Road, Nanking, October 10, 1946, 10:45 a.m.
 
 
 Nanking, October 10, 1946, 10:45 a.m. 
 
 
 
Also present:
 
Colonel Caughey
 
 
 
General Yu Ta Wei mentioned that he had heard of General Marshall’s trip to Shanghai to meet General Chou and that the results were not attractive. He then asked what was to be done next.
 
General Marshall said that he was not certain. He said that he had just read the full statement released by General Chou En-lai concerning the misunderstanding with reference to terminologies and setting forth the 3 military and 8 political points. General Marshall stated, however, that the tenor of the statement would indicate a more amenable 
attitude on the part of General Chou than General Chou had indicated yesterday.
 
General Marshall continued by outlining the salient points of the meeting which he had had with General Chou En-lai explaining in detail the difficulties with reference to terminologies. He then read to General Yu Ta Wei from the minutes of the Chou En-lai meeting the applicable parts pertaining to the three military and eight political points.
 
Again, General Yu Ta Wei asked what General Marshall was going to do. General Marshall indicated that there was nothing that he could do at the moment and that both he and the Government would have to wait until General Chou En-lai submitted a written statement—which he (General Chou) said he would submit—to the Government with reference to his new position. General Marshall stated that he would probably, for the time being, let Dr. Stuart handle negotiations.
 
General Marshall stated that members of the Young China Party and an erstwhile member of the Democratic League had met with Dr. Stuart this morning. They indicated an assurance that they would do everything possible within their power to assist, and that they would attempt to bring General Chou En-lai from Shanghai for the purpose of further negotiations.
 
General Marshall stated that his going to Shanghai to see General Chou probably placed him (General Chou) in a rather difficult position which might result in a change of position more hopeful for continued negotiations.
 
General Marshall concluded by asking General Yu Ta Wei what progress had been made in the campaign against Kalgan. General Yu Ta Wei replied that the Government forces had reached Chang Pei, 20 miles directly north of Kalgan, and that it was this advance that most likely would capture that town.