Notes of Conference Between General Marshall and General C. P. Lee at General Marshall’s Residence, Nanking, October 15, 1946, 11:15 a.m.
 
Marshall Mission Files, Lot 54–D270
 
[Document 190]
 
Notes of Conference Between General Marshall and General C. P. Lee
 
65
 
at General Marshall’s Residence, Nanking, October 15, 1946, 11:15 a.m.
 
 
 Nanking, October 15, 1946, 11:15 a.m. 
 
 
 
Also present:
 
Captain Soong
66
 
 
 
 
General Lee reported that he had conferred with Mr. Tung Pi-wu of the Communist delegation, who had told him that the fundamental question in the China issue today is between the United States and Russia. Answering General Lee’s question regarding the loss of Kalgan, Mr. Tung said that the capture of Kalgan by the Government troops did not alter the situation very much because the Communists did not lose their strength. It was Mr. Tung’s belief that the United States’ China policy would now determine the issue.
 
General Marshall said American policy is one thing and propaganda another.
 
General Lee further stated that the Communists are now accusing the United States of gathering all the conservative elements in the world, including the President of the Philippine Islands, to oppose Russia. General Marshall stated that he resented very much the bringing of the Philippine Islands into the discussion. He stated that American policy toward the Philippines was one of the most honorable episodes in world history.
 
General Lee then said that it is very difficult to change the Communists’ psychology. However, General Lee felt that there is still a chance for peace because the Communists are being badly defeated. If the Government is sincere in securing peace and shows the Communist Party as much leniency as possible, then peace is still obtainable.
 
General Marshall said he and Dr. Stuart had done their best to persuade the Government to give all possible concessions. The only thing they could get from the Government at this time was the 10–day truce which the Communists rejected.
 
General Lee asked about the possibility of initiating the Five Man Advisory Group he proposed previously.
 
General Marshall said that Dr. Sun Fo now has a similar organization and that he was in Nanking conferring with the Generalissimo yesterday. He had now returned to Shanghai with certain terms. It was probably best to wait and see what Dr. Sun and his group would do. General Marshall then said Mr. Liang Shu-ming of the Democratic League felt that the announcement by the Generalissimo, 
confirming the convocation of the National Assembly, closed the front and back doors for further negotiations. General Marshall, however, did not agree.
 
65
 
Gen. Chen-pien Lee, Director of the Serum Institute, Chinese Ministry of National Defense.
66
 
John L. Soong, U. S. Army, language aide to General Marshall.