Minutes of Meeting Between General Marshall and Three Third Party Delegates: Mr. Lo Lung-chi, Mr. Miao Yun-tai, and Mr. Li Hwang at No. 5 Ning Hai Road, Nanking, October 27, 1946, 5:20 p.m.
 
Marshall Mission Files, Lot 54–D270
 
[Document 224]
 
Minutes of Meeting Between General Marshall and Three Third Party Delegates: Mr. Lo Lung-chi, Mr. Miao Yun-tai, and Mr. Li Hwang
 
24
 
at No. 5 Ning Hai Road, Nanking, October 27, 1946, 5:20 p.m.
 
 
 Nanking, October 27, 1946, 5:20 p.m. 
 
 
 
Also present:
 
Col. Hutchin
 
 
 
Mr. Lo Lung Chi informed General Marshall that the Third Party was now facing a crisis in their negotiations because of the recent capture of Antung by Nationalist forces. The Third Party had presented a plan containing three articles to the Communist delegation. Chou En-lai had unofficially accepted practically all three articles. The Third Party delegates were making arrangements for 
a meeting with Government representatives when they heard of the fall of Antung. They immediately called on Chou En-lai again, about 9 o’clock last night, and told him of their earlier meeting with the Chief of Staff, Chen Cheng, who confirmed the capture of Antung. Chou En-lai became very excited. He thought that the Communists should break off all negotiations and that there would be no use to proceed any further; however, he must await instructions from Yenan.
 
General Marshall told the Third Party group that General Yu Ta-wei had come to see him because of a message sent this afternoon urging the Generalissimo to return. The Generalissimo was supposed to have arrived at 2 o’clock this afternoon. General Marshall recalled that he had previously told Third Party delegates that he did not wish to enter the negotiations by asking the Generalissimo to return. However, the Generalissimo’s absence coupled with the current military campaign was now detrimental to the whole situation. General Yu had reported that the Generalissimo was in Shanghai, and that he would arrive here tomorrow morning (28 October).
 
General Marshall had just talked to General Yu Ta-wei about military operations. There was a possible explanation for the Nationalist capture of Antung, but so far, there was none offered for the offensive against Chefoo. Several days ago, General Marshall was told by the Chief of Staff, Chen Cheng, that the Government had, in the north, one army of its Youth Corps which was preparing to return to North China for demobilization. The Government had just begun the concentration of this army when it was attacked between Fushun and Antung by Communist forces with the result that the demobilization program had to be stopped. General Yu explained the attack against Antung was a counter-attack against the very same Communist forces that had disrupted the demobilization of the Youth Corps. The Government was much surprised to find so little resistance and to have Antung fall in their hands so quickly. This was the possible excuse for Antung, but to date none had been offered for Chefoo.
 
General Marshall then explained that during these past months, he has encountered similar actions and procedures on both sides. He urged the Third Party delegates not to be too discouraged over what had happened; it had happened several times before and it may happen again. It was decidedly a two-sided proposition. Maybe some day, they could get both sides together. At present, the Third Party must sit squarely in the middle and remember that both sides are responsible for their seeming inability to agree. The Third Party should be even more determined. The Generalissimo is coming back tomorrow. General Marshall suggested that the Third Party delegates carry their points up to the Generalissimo and to his advisors. In this respect, the way or manner in which the subject was to be presented was very important.
 
 
Mr. Lo Lung Chi asked General Marshall what he thought of the three articles. He then enunciated the three articles as follows: 
 
1. All troops throughout the country were to remain in their present locations, and the cessation of hostilities was to take effect immediately.
 
2. The local governments throughout China, including Manchuria, would be decided by the State Council.
 
3. The five decisions of the PCC would be carried out in accordance with the PCC procedure specified.
 
 
 
As to convening the National Assembly on 12 November, Dr. Lo Lung Chi said that the Third Party was giving consideration to having an opening ceremony on 12 November but postponing all business until a month later for the purpose of awaiting arrivals of the delegates.
 
Mr. Miao elaborated on this point, stating that they would go ahead with the work of the PCC steering committee, particularly with reference to having reorganization of the Government, and to insure full participation of the National Assembly.
 
At this point, General Marshall explained that an indefinite delay in the business of the National Assembly would probably be fatal. It would most likely lead to a winter campaign of total war. There wouldn’t be any hope of maintaining a cessation of hostilities. It is an impractical proposition to reorganize the Government in a short space of time such as a few weeks. It is of paramount importance that the Third Party delegates do everything possible to get the National Assembly in action early. They should get the State Council established and make it a going concern. At least, in that body, there would be a place for debate and discussion. Time is of the essence, and in all of this it is essential to keep in mind the present weakness of Executive Headquarters which has been brought about by provocative propaganda against the Americans.
 
Mr. Miao said that the Third Party realized they should stand absolutely impartial in the middle. First, they should bring about cessation of hostilities, and this should be accomplished by an agreement to specific proposals such as the first article of their proposition. The chief purpose in having only three articles was their desire to boil it down to an absolute minimum.
 
General Marshall said that their first point was certainly sound. Their second point was just a question of getting the Government to agree to it. The third point could possibly lay them open to several pitfalls, particularly in getting involved in detailed procedure. In this respect, General Marshall’s observations were confined largely to reorganization of the government proposition and to the delegates to the National Assembly. Both of these problems are matters of procedure where it will be necessary to make compromises. What the 
Third Party wants to do is to preserve the condition that the Government will be reorganized at some time in the near future, not in three or four years, but within some stipulated period.
 
Mr. Lo Lung Chi stated that the Communists want assurance that the Government will be reorganized, and the Government wants assurance from the Communists that they will participate in the National Assembly. The Third Party must provide this assurance for both sides. Mr. Lo wondered if General Marshall would use his influence on the Generalissimo to stop this military campaign or at least slow it down. There was no use in the Government taking one or two more places. The Government should wait and give the Third Party a chance to do its work.
 
General Marshall said he would and again emphasized the necessity for going ahead with the National Assembly and for the Third Party to avoid getting involved in statements which were too general or too detailed. He suggested that the Third Party, when presenting their proposal to the Generalissimo, take up the political issues first, and then the military situation. Otherwise, they may never get to discuss the political issues.
 
24
 
Co-Chairman of the People’s Political Council and a Chinese delegate to the United Nations Conference.