The Ambassador in China (Stuart) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/10–3046
 
[Document 227]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Stuart
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Nanking
, October 30, 1946.
[Received October 30—12:48 a.m.]
 
 
1759. Following is news report dated October 27 of interview given by Dr. Sun Fo on six points of difference deriving from presentation to the Communists of Gmo’s eight point proposal for peace: 
 
“The six points are: 
 
1. Communist garrison areas in Manchuria. Dr. Sun Fo said that the Manchurian cease fire agreement made in June allocated two and a half provinces in Manchuria to the Communists as garrison areas, but the agreement was not signed at that time because of the dispute over Antung. He said, however, that now the Communists claimed that there never had been an agreement regarding the allocation of two and a half provinces to the Communists and that the only stipulation in the Manchurian cease fire agreement in June was with regard to Harbin.
 
2. Whether the question of local administration should be settled at the informal talks or left to the reorganized State Council.
 
3. A draft of the constitution be presented to the National Assembly. Sun Fo here also indicated that the government wanted the ‘double fifth’ draft of the constitution to be considered as the official draft since there is not sufficient time for the PCC Draft Constitution Reviewing Committee to work out a final form of the PCC draft constitution agreeable to all sides.
 
4. Communist refusal to participate in the National Assembly before the reorganization of the Government.
 
5. Whether the reorganization of the State Council and the Executive Yuan should be carried out simultaneously. Sun Fo said that according to the PCC resolutions the State Council should be reorganized first, followed by the reshuffling of the Executive Yuan. He compared the State Council to the mother and the Executive Yuan to the son. ‘There must be a mother first before you can have a son’, he said.
 
6. The number of Cabinet posts to be given the non-Kuomintang parties.
 
 
 
In the interview Sun Fo disclosed that Democratic Party leader Lo Lung Chi had demanded seven or eight portfolios for the Communists and Third Party members.”
 
 
 
 
 
Stuart