The Ambassador in China (Stuart) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/12–2346: Telegram
 
[Document 348]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Stuart
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Nanking
, December 23, 1946.
[Received December 24—4:15 a.m.]
 
 
2161. Following is statement released by Lo Lung Chi, spokesman of the Democratic League, in connection with President Truman’s broadcast speech: 
 
President Truman’s broadcast speech is a reaffirmation of the American policy on China as announced by him on December 15, last year and deduced from the joint declaration issued by the three Foreign Ministers in Moscow.
43
 If his statement could be released at a much earlier date, it could benefit China much more and certainly reduce much of the doubts and criticisms on the United States policy.
 
The Democratic League still favors the implementation of the PCC resolutions. But unfortunately they have been violated by the Government.
 
Since all the parties do not participate in the National Assembly, the constitution passed by it will not likely be accepted by them or by the people.
 
Even if the Government is reorganized, it is very doubtful whether all the parties will take part in it. So there is every likelihood that the civil war will increase in scale and intensity.
 
As to the plan for solving the disputes in China, it is hoped that the friendly powers will observe the declaration of the three Foreign Ministers in Moscow and that America will strictly follow the second 
statement of President Truman. Only by the observance of the above announcements will peace be restored in China. With the restoration of peace, the friendly relations between China and America will be restored and improved.
 
 
 
 
 
Stuart
 
 
 
43
 
December 27, 1945; for correspondence, see 
 
Foreign Relations
, 1945, vol. 
ii
, pp. 560
 ff.; for section 
iv
 of the Communiqué by the Three Foreign Ministers, which deals with China, see 
 
ibid
., p. 821
, or Department of State 
Bulletin
, December 30, 1945, p. 1030.