The Ambassador in China (Stuart) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/8–2946: Telegram
 
[Document 55]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Stuart
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Nanking
, August 29, 1946—5 p.m. 
[Received August 30—7:45 a.m.]
 
 
1400. Announcement has been made of death sentence passed in Kunming on two junior officers of the special service battalion of the Yunnan garrison headquarters by military court as penalty for assassination of Wen I-to. (ReEmbtel 1337, August 20 and previous.) Announcement was made in statement giving history of case, details of trial and the verdict. General Ho Kwei-chang, Yunnan garrison commander, was relieved of his command for failure to maintain peace and order in Kunming and properly discipline his subordinates. Ho Shao-chu, a nephew of Ho Ying-chin
20
 and deputy garrison commander, has been appointed to succeed Ho Kwei-chang.
 
A statement made by the two officers in admitting their guilt said that their acts were premeditated and was caused by their inability to accept with [apparent omission] criticism of military forces made by Wen I-to at the memorial service for Li Kung-pu immediately preceding Wen’s death. If anyone has yet been charged with the murder of Li Kung-pu, no announcement of this has been made.
 
An airgram from Consulate in Kunming dated August 12,
21
 which is being forwarded to Department, states that all those who took refuge in the Consulate with the exception of one have left Kunming now, and that this person is scheduled to leave within a few days with Liang Sou-ming
22
 who has been in Kunming investigating the case on behalf of the Democratic League.
 
 
Press reports have recently stated that Chang Lan, Democratic League Chairman, was beaten up by special service agents in Chengtu a few days ago at a memorial service for Li and Wen.
 
20
 
Chief of the Chinese Military Mission to the United states and Chinese chief delegate to the United Nations Military Staff Committee.
21
 
Not printed.
22
 
Social reformer, university professor, and author of 
Rural Reconstruction in China
.