The Ambassador in China (Stuart) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/1–948: Telegram
 
[Document 14]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Stuart
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Nanking
, January 9, 1948—5 p. m. 
[Received January 10—4:30 a. m.]
 
 
63. We consider that statement made by Carson Chang to Secretary probably basically correct but of little, if any, significance. (ReDeptel 18, January 6, 8 p. m.
44
 )
 
It has been impossible to make any careful analysis of national election returns because full returns have not yet been published. National election office itself has not received complete and accurate reports, and elections still taking place in some areas. In addition to the general paucity of reliable information even in hands of the Govt, we do not have sufficient personnel to produce an adequate analysis of China’s first national election.
 
We would observe, however, that no political machine is 100 percent perfect and it is very likely that a number of candidates in districts, whose importance we are not in position to assess, were elected on the basis of local popularity. Whether such deviations from the general trend of election returns will reflect liberal or progressive opinion remains a moot question which will be resolved only when there has been opportunity to follow the results of the first session of the National Assembly under new constitution. At the present time we are constrained to observe that the Kuomintang has carried the National Assembly elections as expected, and that control of the party machinery by the more reactionary elements of the party leads us to believe that rightist elements will dominate the National Assembly when it meets although this body may be expected to serve as a sounding board for the protests of liberal opinion as was the case in the now defunct PPC.
45
 It seems reasonable to assume that the same result may be expected when the elections for the Legislative Yuan are held. Current trends are such as to suggest that the leader of the CC clique Chen Li-fu may be elected president of the Legislative Yuan, but the CC clique will probably not attempt to control the Ministry of Finance, the Governorship of the Central Bank, or the Presidency of the Executive Yuan, but will endeavor to use adherents of the more liberal political science group to manage fiscal policies and to seek additional foreign aid.
 
 
At the present time we see no change in the trend which has been developing during the past year, i. e., a continual strengthening of the CC clique. In current circumstances in China, especially since the outlawing of the Democratic League, of [
sic
] non-Kuomintang opinion of a liberal or progressive character has become increasingly impotent. In somewhat less degree, but equally noticeable, progressive opinion within the Kuomintang itself is being stifled by the increasing strength of the right wing.
 
Despatch on election result is under preparation and will be forwarded by mid-January.
 
 
 
Stuart
 
 
 
44
 
Not printed; the Secretary of State informed Ambassador Stuart that Carsun Chang, leader of the Chinese Democratic Socialist Party, had stated that the number of adherents in the CC clique suffered unforeseen defeats in the “National Assembly elections Nov at hands less reactionary candidates having strong local support and that despite activities Party machine election results here and there reflected liberal opinion.” (893.00/1–648)
45
 
People’s Political Council.