The Ambassador in China (Stuart) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/9–848: Airgram
 
[Document 351]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Stuart
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Nanking
, September 8, 1948.
[Received September 17—1:20 p. m.]
 
 
A–223. Following was monitored from Chinese Communist North Shensi broadcast September 2: 
 
“Marking a milestone in China’s democratic revolution, a united democratic North China government—The North China People’s Government—came into being after a 13-day session of the North China Provisional People’s Representative Congress.
 
“By secret ballot Congress elected 27 members including Tung Pi-wu, former delegate of the Chinese Communist Party to the United Nations conference at San Francisco, Po Yi-po, representative of North China Bureau of Chinese Communist Party Central Committee, Hsu Hsiang-chien, commander of the North China People’s Liberation 1st Army Group, Fan Wen-lan, well-known Chinese historian, Chen Chin-kun, a well-known jurist, and Ting Yi, a Democratic League member, as members of the North China Government Council. The remaining 12 seats are reserved for members from new regions to be liberated in North China.
 
“An administrative program and other bills for the North China liberated area were adopted by the Congress whose 541 representatives include workers, peasants, revolutionary army men, merchants, industrialists, professional men, new-type rich peasants, social luminaries, enlightened gentry, Democratic League members, Muslim leaders, representatives from certain people’s organizations in Kmt controlled areas and women representatives.
 
“The Congress was presided over by a presidium of 23 including non-partisan Chen Chin-kun, Kao Chen, wife of professor Wen I-to, Democratic League leader who was murdered by Kuomintang secret police in Kunming, Democratic League members Ting Yi and Shang Yueh and Muslim Leader Ho Chi-kun.
 
“During sessions of the Congress, the representatives brought forth 1180 proposals regarding the formation of the new government which were hotly discussed in detail. Among the proposals adopted after voting were drafts on the organization of the North China People’s Government, election of village, county and city people’s representatives and organization of village, county and municipal people’s governments.
 
“After proclaiming the establishment of the North China People’s Government on the basis of a patriotic democratic united front for striking down of American imperialistic and Kuomintang reactionary rule in China, the Congress successfully closed its session on the night of the 19th.”
 
 
 
 
 
Stuart