The Ambassador in China (Stuart) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/1–2849: Telegram
 
[Document 114]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Stuart
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Nanking
, January 28, 1949—6 p. m. 
[Received January 30—2:10 a. m.]
 
 
264. ReEmbtel 205, January 25, repeated Moscow 8. We do not doubt that CCP regards as important achievement statement of 55 members of minority parties and other left-wing organizations broadcast by North Shensi Radio January 23. By thus captivating these fellow-travelers, CCP must have greatly reduced apprehension that, following collapse of Kmt, Chinese public opinion might polarize around some left-wing political body other than CCP. Importance of neutralizing and then crushing competitive left-wing parties is, of course, emphasized in all of Lenin writings. That CCP takes this lesson to heart was manifested in North Shensi Radio broadcast of October 30, which went so far as to assert that US Government espionage organizations in China had set for themselves task of to “strive to reach an understanding with elements with leftist leanings in Socialist parties, develop anti-Communist activities in trade unions and peasant organizations, and stir up discord between leftist leaders and destroy their prestige”.
 
In addition to labor leaders, so far we have recognized among signatories leaders of following parties: KmtRC, Democratic League, Che Kung Tung, Association for Promotion of Democratic Rule in China, Democratic Party of Chinese Farmers and Laborers, and National Salvation Association of Chinese People.
 
Essentially statement is nothing less than repetition, in slight paraphrase, of all important CCP pronouncements during past few months. Thoughts were excerpted from Mao Tse-tung’s article on October Revolution, Liu Shao-chi’s
85
 article on “Nationalism and Internationalism”, CCP New Year’s Day message, Mao Tse-tung’s eight point peace program of January 15 [
14
], etc. This statement makes no original contribution to announced CCP platform. On the contrary it endorses such CCP dogma as that there is no middle road between Communists and Kmt, revolution must be carried to very end, all Chinese left-wing parties are united under leadership of CCP, and Mao Tse-tung’s eight points. We regard as strong evidence that Li Chi-shen and his KmtRC have become puppets of CCP [the] fact 
that statement does not make one single effort to entice liberal elements from Kmt over to KmtRC.
 
Slightly unfavorable side are facts that statement fails to reaffirm CCP refusal to order cease-fire prior to beginning peace negotiations and that only slight reference is made to Soviet Union with somewhat dubious compliment that signers believe they can establish peaceful, democratic and free-speaking China in shorter time than this was accomplished in USSR.
 
So thoroughly abject is statement that we can only conclude any “democratic coalition government” formed largely with participation of these 55 signatories would be so completely dominated by CCP as to render inapplicable adjectives “democratic” and “coalition”.
 
Sent Department, repeated Moscow 13, pouched Nanking [
Shanghai?
].
 
 
 
Stuart
 
 
 
85
 
Vice-Chairman of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party.