The Consul General at Peiping (Clubb) to the Secretary of State
 
125.633/10–1749: Telegram
 
[Document 1217]
 
The Consul General at Peiping
 (
Clubb
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Peiping
, October 17, 1949—1 a. m. 
[Received 5:32 a. m.]
 
 
1757. ReDeptel 711, October 14. Respectfully note there have already been several public statements regarding position Mukden Consulate without result. Believe new statement at this time would likewise fail achieve desired result, i.e. removal personnel. Letter to Chou En-lai was sent only week ago, there is still possibility getting results from that move. Last Mukden telegram was dated October 8. There may be some change there one way or another. Am communicating today asking for situation report.
 
There is another avenue direct approach Chou; after manner either British or French (Contel 1733, October 13
4
 ), could request interview 
with Chou without indication purpose visit. On arrival Foreign Office subject should obviously be more than case Mukden. Department might wish consider advisability making such approach for discussion several matters. Most effective, if deemed advisable at this time, would be request for Communist reaction regarding project for Jessup
5
 visit Communist-controlled areas (if this be planned); that is, whether he would be granted entry and contact with Communist officials. Other possible subjects would be on trade, laws and treaties affecting that trade and foreign rights and interests, and Consulate’s relations in present interim period. First of three would be of most interest to Communists but leads naturally to other questions including particularly that Mukden. Such conversation would be in line proposal contained Contel 1703 [
1704
], October 8
6
 and might result in more clarification of situation than obtained thus far.
 
Note finally that Chen Ming-shu
7
 earlier promised take up at Peiping the subject (Nanking telegram 1215, June 13 [
6
]
8
 ) and that I here had proposed to L. K. Tao that those interested in better relations with U.S.A. (as reputedly Lo Lung-chi
9
 ) would be well advised give early attention Mukden case (Contel 1641, September 29). Chinese are currently very wary of contacts with Americans but am trying contact Chen or Lo regarding matter, otherwise will try take it up with someone Yenching October 22 when visit there planned.
 
Emphasize my belief such public statement would more probably retard than advance matter at this time. Therefore recommend statement not be issued until after steps outlined above have been taken and such new statement is discovered be only resort.
 
Will comment on proposed text statement and another point in separate messages.
 
 
 
Clubb
 
 
 
4
 
Not printed.
5
 
Philip C. Jessup, Ambassador at Large.
6
 
 
Vol. 
ix
, p. 111
.
7
 
Leader of the Kuomintang Revolutionary Committee (KmtRC).
8
 
Not printed.
9
 
A leader of the Democratic League and member of the Communist regime at Peiping.