The Consul at Shanghai (McConaughy) to the Secretary of State
 
893.918/7–2749: Telegram
 
[Document 1586]
 
The Consul at Shanghai
 (
McConaughy
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Shanghai
, July 27, 1949—10 p. m. 
[Received July 28—1:51 a. m.]
 
 
2932. ReConGentel 2920 to Department, 1640 to Nanking, July 27. I called at Foreign Affairs Bureau at 11:30 accompanied by Forman
24
 as interpreter to intercede behalf Gould and Miner. I was received ungraciously by Feng Chi-ho whose attitude has hardened notably not already done so, pls make strong representations Gould–Miner lock-in and requested immediate action by authorities lift siege. I stressed fact individuals forcibly detaining Gould and Miner were private citizens, not officials local regime, adding presumably their action was lawless by any standard. Feng said Foreign Affairs Bureau could not recognize my right to speak on behalf Gould and Miner since I had not shown I was connected with case. I told Feng if he wished he could consider me as speaking in capacity of friend of Gould and Miner. He said friendship did not afford valid basis my intervention and FAB could not discuss case with me. I remonstrated pointing out by this line of reasoning no one in Shanghai could speak on behalf Gould and Miner and since they were wrongfully held by disaffected workers, they had no way of speaking for themselves, hence refusal heed my request amounted to denial of all recourse.
 
Despite Feng’s unwillingness to hear me out, I proceeded to outline outrageous circumstances under which two Americans were held: Their lack food, water and sleep for 24 hours; refusal of workers permit messengers deliver anything and helplessness of victims do anything for themselves without assistance of authorities. Feng said he did not believe my account of Gould-Miner plight. I said best way for authorities confirm or refute account was to proceed personally to office where Gould and Miner were held at 17 The Bund and ascertain facts by survey on spot. Feng said authorities could not accept any suggestions from me and brusquely rose to signify interview was terminated. I did not rise immediately. After short interval, I rose 
deliberately and raising my voice slightly said local regime would find it highly embarrassing if through negligence of authorities these two Americans came to any harm at hands of workers who were forcibly detaining them. Feng said I had no right make any such statement to representatives [of] People’s Government. I said “That is all,” without taking any cognizance of Feng’s remark. I then strode abruptly from room without endeavoring shake hands, making my displeasure unmistakable. Feng had already made it clear he did not intend to make any move to shake hands.
 
On appointment slip I wrote as subject for discussion “safety of Mr. Gould and Mr. Miner, American citizens,” thereby running risk being refused interview, but if I had not written down subject, I would not have been permitted bring it up at all and fact I was received on that subject is something of tactical gain. At least, it is formally on record now we presented facts this flagrant case to authorities and officially requested redress. Despite bad reception I got, authorities may be alarmed into taking some action this afternoon to lift siege. If they do not, their position is far more indefensible than before I called.
 
Situation of Gould and Miner will become genuinely serious by tonight or early tomorrow if no relief obtained. I plan try another approach through Democratic League intermediaries late this afternoon if nothing accomplished by then.
 
Recommend Department be prepared give full publicity this outrage VOA and press if ConGen later recommends such course. This might further jeopardize functioning ConGen but it is risk we must undergo if we are to use only means at our disposal at moment to protect Americans here.
 
Sent Department, repeated Nanking 1646.
 
 
 
McConaughy
 
 
 
24
 
Douglas N. Forman, Vice Consul at Shanghai.