The Ambassador in China (Stuart) to the Secretary of State
 
102.22/7–2949: Telegram
 
[Document 1590]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Stuart
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Nanking
, July 29, 1949—11 a. m. 
[Received July 29—12:05 p. m.]
 
 
1651. [To Peiping:] ConGen Shanghai invaded this a. m. by ex-Navy employees who refuse to leave till settlement their demands (see Shanghai’s telegram 227, July 29 to Peiping
25
 ), force being used to prevent entrance and exit to ConGen building. Approximately 11 officers compelled spend night in office. Local authorities have consistently ignored pleas for intervention, protection. Matter was placed in their hands at their request 2 weeks ago. They assured that employees would make no further disturbances while they were studying case; in any event ConGen has no authority to negotiate on behalf US Navy. Navy has offered to send in representatives to negotiate but Communist officials Shanghai have ignored this suggestion.
 
Some members mob invading ConGen today have become hysterical acting in irresponsible manner. Because recent typhoon damage, ConGen without lights, water. Officers cut off from commissary by occupation ConGen building.
 
I suggest you communicate with Joseph Chang
26
 or his father earliest and beg him report this outrageous development to Chou
27
 or Mao. Point out that local authorities have been completely unresponsive; that regardless of lack of official relations persons besieged are officials of US Government and that situation of this nature if allowed develop may end in tragedy. In any event it cannot fail to have very serious effects on future relations between China and USA and reflect grave discredit on Chinese Communist regime in eyes of civilized world.
 
Sent Peiping 306, repeated Department 1651, Shanghai 918.
 
 
 
Stuart
 
 
 
25
 
Same as telegram No. 2959, 
supra
.
26
 
Son of Professor Chang Tung-sun, Yenching University, of the Democratic League.
27
 
Chou En-lai, of the Central Committee of the Chinese Party.