The Consul General at Shanghai (Cabot) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/5–1249: Telegram
 
[Document 364]
 
The Consul General at Shanghai
 (
Cabot
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Shanghai
, May 12, 1949—5 p. m. 
[Received 8:37 p. m.]
 
 
1620. Lo Lung-chi and Chang Lan
8
 being held in single room at Hungjao Hospital together with one garrison guard who present at all times (remytel to Department 1594, May 10
9
 ). Visitors not allowed.
 
Lo and Chang both known to be in good health, well treated except for rather abusive, rude, verbal handling on night of arrest.
 
American correspondents have unsuccessfully sought admittance Lo’s room. All press releases concerning arrest killed by censorship.
 
ConGen informed by member Democratic League close to Lo that Lo and probably Chang, fearing drastic measures by military authorities against leftist leaders still in Shanghai, were planning quick getaway to North China in morning before arrest. Believed possible arrests were timed primarily to prevent their departure. However, seems probable that they are also part of planned larger roundup of leftists and Communist sympathizers. Peng Wen-yi, chairman Shanghai branch Democratic League, informed officers ConGen he had narrowly escaped arrest Tuesday night by hiding on roof while police searched friend’s flat where he had taken refuge after hearing of Lo’s detention. Yeh Tu-yi in hiding for fear arrest. Fear also expressed over safety Miss Pu Hsi-hsiu, journalist and fiancée of Lo, who released 
several months ago from 70-day jail term in Nanking. Chang, Miss Pu and other members League fear military authorities have “black list” of leftist leaders whom they wish detain for hostage purposes. They anxious that acting President Li Tsung-jen be prevailed upon to act their behalf though aware unlikelihood that he has sufficient influence this area and express hope that in view censorship of news our Embassy Canton might find opportunity to inform Li re perilous situation of Democratic Leaguers and similar groups. They say even Tang En-po powerless as their fate lies in hands three persons: Map Sen
10
 who takes orders direct from Generalissimo, Chiang Ching-kuo, Generalissimo’s eldest son who they say once again in Shanghai, or Generalissimo himself.
 
Sent Department 1620, repeated Nanking 891, Embassy Canton 442. Passed Peiping 148, and Hong Kong 91.
 
 
 
Cabot
 
 
 
8
 
Leaders of the Democratic League.
9
 
Not printed.
10
 
Shanghai police commissioner.