The Ambassador in China (Stuart) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/5–2849: Telegram
 
[Document 415]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Stuart
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Nanking
, May 28, 1949—1 p. m. 
[Received May 28—5:42 a. m.]
 
 
1129. Following is report from Clubb
46
 who has taken message to Chang Tung-sun
47
 at Yenching. I asked Chang come here feeling confident he had information useful me take Washington.
 
 
“Communists still free to determine policy as respects domestic affairs and indications are that they are inclining to right. They are still, however, not in position part from USSR and take separate line foreign affairs. Of primary present significance in their respect foreign relations is Council Foreign Ministers now meeting Paris. If as result that meeting USSR retreats there can come about change in respect CCP foreign policy. If CFM on contrary breaks up this can be bad for Americans in China. Those personally who would assist re amelioration Sino-American relations must now be very careful in order preserve opportunity act effectively later. It is essential await outcome CFM meeting. If USSR retreats along lines indicated above, Chang would be in position go Nanking. If CFM, however, breaks up it could be anticipated war would occur within 6 months (approximately 10 characters garbled) useless.
 
Chang saw Chou En-lai yesterday and reported latter indicated receptive attitude re particular question trade with foreign nations. He said people like Mao Tse-tung, Liu Shao-chi and Chou were aware of need re forming trade and foreign relations but were not in position readily impose their concepts and judgments on lower strata in part which has been subjected education along different lines. He emphasized his belief that there was tendency toward adjustment position this respect as far as concerned Americans but said Communists acted very slowly.
 
Chang said that he had proposed to Chou that after occupation Shanghai he, Chang, should go to Shanghai to look things over. Chou had approved suggestion and Chang therefore proposed tentatively depart end June or beginning July. He modified what he had said previously to extent asking me tell you that if he went Shanghai he would then go Nanking see you. In view all circumstances, however, he considered it useless proceed prior to crystallization events at CFM meeting.[”]
 
 
Sent Department, repeated OffEmb Canton 471, Shanghai 631.
 
 
 
Stuart
 
 
 
46
 
O. Edmund Clubb, Consul General at Peiping.
47
 
Peiping leader of the Democratic League.