The Consul General at Peiping (Clubb) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/10–349: Telegram
 
[Document 621]
 
The Consul General at Peiping
 (
Clubb
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Peiping
, October 3, 1949.
[Received October 3—7:42 a. m.]
 
 
1667. ReContel 1658, September 30. Final session PCC September 30 unanimously elected Mao Tze-tung chairman of Central People’s Government of People’s Republic of China and six vice chairmen Chang Lan, Chu Teh, Kao Kang, Li Chi-shen, Liu Shao-chi and Madame Sun Yat-sen. Central organ of state authority is People’s Government Council with 56 members as given by NCNA October 1. September 30 final session also elected 180 members of National Committee Chinese People’s PCC of which 18 seats reserved for areas to be 
liberated, and passed final declaration (NCNA September 30). PCC closing speech delivered by Chu Teh (NCNA October 1). Central People’s Government of People’s Republic of China established here October 1 with formal proclamation by Chairman Mao (NCNA English October 1).
 
Mao stated Central People’s Government Council took office October 1 and unanimously made following decision: 
 
(1) Proclamation of formation of Central People’s Government.
 
(2) Adoption common program of Chinese People’s PCC as policy for new government.
 
(3) Election of Lin Po-chu as Secretary-General of Central People’s Government Council.
 
(4) Appointment of Chou En-lai as Premier of State Administration Council [con]currently Foreign Minister; Mao Tze-tung as [Chairman of] Chinese People’s Republic Military Council; Chu Teh as CinC of PLA; Shen Chun-ju as Chief Justice Supreme People’s Court; Lo Jung-huan as Procurator General.
 
 
 
Mao proclamation further stated Central People’s Government Council decided to declare to governments all other countries that this government is the sole legal government representing all peoples of People’s Republic of China, (ReContel 1666, October 2 [
1
].) Afore-cited NCNA English version of second sentence final paragraph of proclamation reads “this government is willing to establish diplomatic relations with any foreign Government which is willing to observe the principles of equality, mutual benefit and mutual respect of territorial integrity and sovereignty.”
99
 
 
Sent to Department, repeated Shanghai 1833, Tientsin by mail.
 
 
 
Clubb
 
 
 
99
 
For further documentation on question of recognition, see 
vol. 
ix
, pp. 1
 ff.