The Ambassador in China (Stuart) to the Secretary of State
 
123 Stuart, J. Leighton: Telegram
 
[Document 907]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Stuart
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
 
Nanking
, June 18, 1949—7 p. m. 
[Received June 19—2:01 a. m.]
 
 
1322. Now that I have completed Shanghai visit only remaining major problem before my departure China is safety, withdrawal Mukden ConGen staff. Although wall of silence finally broken, progress this problem slow, doubtful. These [
There
] is also reported pre-Political Consultative Conference Peiping which I surmise Chen Ming-shu and others have gone north to attend. I should like to obtain some firsthand information on it before my return Washington. Chang Tung-sun,
60
 who may still visit me Nanking en route Shanghai next month, will be delegate. (See Peiping’s 644, June 9, repeated Department 969,
61
 Canton 155.) Consequently if there is not too great discrepancy between happy conclusion Mukden affair and termination pre-PCC, I should like to delay my departure China until I can have received firsthand accounts of Communist position, possible future coalition government from some of my old friends in attendance. (See Embtel 1280, June 13, repeated Canton 529, Shanghai 693.) In any event I shall comply with Department’s instruction to consult re exact date my intended departure within next few weeks.
 
Present status plans other major powers to recall Ambassadors for consultation are as follows: 
 
1. Netherlands Ambassador expects recall and will not return China. (For Department’s confidential information, I believe he is resisting recall.)
 
2. British Ambassador has no specific instructions to return but convinced it is HMG’s intention recall him eventually and before formation Communist Nationalist [
National?
] Government. HMS 
Amethyst
 affair is of course holding Stevenson here as Mukden affair detains me.
 
3. French Ambassador has no instructions to return and on contrary believes his Government desires him remain China until France has worked out details recognition Chinese Communist Government. (Department may wish to try to bring French Government into line with others since it is absurd to believe that Communist aspirations French Indochina will be influenced by appeasement policy followed by French Ambassador, Nanking.)
 
4. Canadian Ambassador plans to return Canada for normal home leave this summer.
 
5. Belgian, Italian and Portuguese have no instructions, but Italian Ambassador is suggesting his return Rome during summer and following my departure. Believe Portuguese will follow our [and] British lead.
 
6. Indian and Burmese Ambassadors apparently have authority to leave at any time and are planning to return their respective countries as soon as exit permit facilities established and transportation available.
 
7. Thailand Ambassador instructed close Embassy Nanking and return Bangkok.
 
8. Afghan Minister recalled Kabul, leaving First Secretary in charge Nanking.
 
 
 
Sent Department; repeated OffEmb Canton 550, Shanghai 717.
 
 
 
Stuart
 
 
 
60
 
Professor at Yenching University, Peiping; member of the Democratic League.
61
 
 
Ante
, p. 376 
[
Pg. 376 includes portions of 
Doc. 445
 and 
Doc. 446
]
.