sterling area. 


up 


and! the’ Sea ‘of Ja 


eS ee 


ae Since 16591 


‘No. 34543. 


_ DEBAT! 


-Russians hadligae: taldnel 
over Shanghas 
Country Club 


The Hammer and Sickle is 
\Ikely to fly: over the Belittah 
Country Club in Shanghal In 
the course of the next few 
days, according to a report re- 
celved in Hong Kong yester- 
day: 

A said the’ building, which 
has been Inspected and mea- 

+ eured by-the Russians, will be 
turned Inte housing quarters for 
Rucalan officials or advisers 
who are reported to have ar- 
rived In Bhanghai recently. 

The Country Club-—one of - 
the oldest and most exclualve 
clubs in China—ts only one of 
many bulldings that have been 
takon over by the Soviet Rus- 
sians in Shanghai.—Reuter, 


aww 


Anglo-U. S. 
dispute 
over oil | 


Washington, March 22. 

The State Department has 
suggested that’ American oll 
companies agree to accept 
about 70 per cent payment in 
“sterling Wlien’ ‘they sell their 
oil in the British area. 

Informed officials said this plan 
was presented ‘by oll company 
executives ax the basis of a 
“eompromise” proposal to settle 
their, long-standing argument 
with Britatn. 

Most major off companies are 
understood to oppose’ the State 
Department plan, . 
* They.feel Britain should be 
asked to pay about 60 per cent 
in dollars and only 40 per cent in 
sterling. . 

* The American companies claim 
60 per cent represents more oc- 
curately the cost in dollars - in 


.. producing off they sell jn Britata 


and: the sterling: ares. ‘They ore 
willing to. accept pounds: sterling 
for the remainder with the under- 
standing they will be permitted 
to apend it gradually in the 


Under the State Department 
plan, Britain would have té re- 
move its. present ban’ on sale of 
American fuel oil In Britain and 
ein one-third cut In Amertean oll 
im 

in ‘addition, Britain would have 
to promise to permit American 
oll companics to compete in so- 
called “third countries” which 
now_ buy_only__British-produced 
oil, This would include opening 
the mnrket in Argentina, 
Sweden and Denmark and would 
afford an opportunity to: get a 
share. of a market totalling 
3,000,000 tons a. year, 

Americun oil companies have 
complained to the State Depart- 
ment that the British oll restric- 
tlons at home and in "third 
countrics" mean a loss of 
US$125,000,000 a-vear in their 
business operations.—Associated 
Press, 3 


Taipeh denies 
counterfeiter's 


accusation 


Taipeh, March 22, ° 

The Finance Minister today da- 

scribed us a fantastle fabrication 
the charge ‘made by a counter- 
felter at. Manila that’ he had 
manufactured bogus United States 
$50 bills ‘at the request.of an agent 
of the Nationalist Government.> ; 
- The Minister, Dr. C.K, Yen, 
sail there was no.basis whatever 
for this accusatlon, which ho sald 
~ was all nonsense. 

The charge was ‘credited he 
Manila police to Antipaz Pineda, |- 
40, under arrest with four others 
for counterfeiting a large. number 
of United na dollar Lamas 
sociated Press.” os 


(rp, fr) >, if 
. Biodetate antl-crelone "dominates, Keren, 
ith tidge {ot 

. high’ premaure’ extending . SE'wargs 
apan and the, Pacifa : to‘ the - BE: 


Yeeally, winds. Ch 
zala: carly ‘tn: the ane. wi E 


LEGISL 


and Mr. P. S. Cassidy. 


ae ees 


TIVE COUNCIL! 


Unofficial members criticise 
tax increase, failure of 
Services to. to. pay Tents 


ALTERNATIVE TAX TAX” PROPOSALS. 


The debate on Hong Kong’s Budget in Legislative Council yester- 
' day. was featured by some strong criticism.on the part of Un- 
official Members both of the proposed increased taxation un- 
der the Intand Revenue Ordinance and ‘of the non-payment of 
rent for premises requisitioned by the Services. : 


Most outspoken critics in connection with the latter were Sir Man-kam Lo. 


Sir Man-kam decla-ed that if Government's - 


reply were not satisfactory, the Unofficial members would have to 
‘consider moving deferment of the second reading of the Bill until the 
Services had assumed liability, or move a vote of censure on Govern- 


ment. 


Mr. Cassidy, roforring to owners ‘of property siquisitionad last summer ond 
who aro still waiting for payment of rent by the Services, tormod the © 
situation a glaring caso of injustice. 


Only one Unofficial Member 
Mr. M. M. Watson—support- 
ed the proposed increased 
taxation. Sir Man-kam' In 
‘gave the proposal qualified ap- 
‘proval but reserved judgment 
on. the increase in personsi 
ugsessments. 


Several UnoMeial Members 
proposed . alternative forms of 
taxation, ranging from a business 
firma'-registration tax to increas 
taxes: on ~ ¢igarettes,” 
vorious kinds of ‘entertainment, 

Government's reply to the de- 
bate will be given next Wednes- 
day, March ‘29, 


MR. T.N. CHAU 


Alternate forms 


of taxation 


| This eminently is 


Mr. T.N, Chau criticised the 
ever-mounting cost-of adminis- 
tration. He referred to the 
colossal figure of expenditure 
and felt that we could not go 
beyond this $200,000,000 without 
facing ultimate bankruptcy. The 
situation called for drastic re- 
trenchment and reduction In 
Government expenditure. 

The -number. of Government 
personnel did not appear to have 
heen noticeably reduced and ex= 
penditure remained undimlinishad. 
Mr, Chau ‘criticised the expendj- 
ture’on uniforms and conveyance. 

The Financial Secretary, he 
thought, was unduly alarmed by 
the monster of deficit. Was the 
latter -s0 .alarming that it neces- 
sitated the. sudden and drastic 
dherense of 50 per cent ip Income 

‘ax 


~The present form of taxa: 
‘thon Ia not acceptable because 
it ts inequitable and wrong in 
principle, Direct taxation 
ahould nover -be considered 
- Unless there is no other moans 
af securing the desired ravenue. 
and there are -various other 
‘mources of revenue apart from 
tneonie Tax.” : 


° Mr. 
taxation of car owners, or a. tax 
an bleycles, or an~ increase ‘in 
Betting Duties, or.a further ‘levy |, 
a Luxuries” Tox, or a Business 
rt ae 
+ “Thesd | indirect’ “taxes would 
.not be so resented as the pro. 
“posed -direct. taxation, for of: a 
‘population of some 2,000,000, only 
‘about one ' coat aver paid 
these -taxes up ie: March, 1949, 
‘not | ie 


Cae ied Is 


od a duty 


| seven or eight millions. 


SIR MAN-KAM LO 


Substantial point 


of controversy 


Sit Man-kam‘Lo sald the-only | 


‘substamtial” point of castroveray 
was the Ancrease. in direct. taxa- 
tion, .It was sound polley - to 
balance the budget In order to 
wipe out what otherwise would 
be un anticipated deficit of some 
If ‘the 
horizon were clear, and if. there 
were no likelihood of trade re- 
trogressiun, he wodld oppose the 
suggested new taxation, but the 
past year had been onc: of 
stress¢s and strain and they did 


not see any let- “up for sometime 
to come. _ 


He asked that no final settlement 
be reached at the London confer- 
ence without prior relerence to 
the Council. 


Requisitioning” 


sir Man-kam then turned to: 


requisitioning. The '. public, he 
said, renlised the necessity for 


requisition yaa ihe owners. of. re 
a 


altioned naturally. 
expected to rensopable 
compensation. eee owners had 
erected buildings. on borrowed 
money,“on whic hey, had to” pay 
interest,’ and ‘many of them 


not received .a cent of compensa- ’ 


tion. 


If- Government's - roply “wero 
not satlafactory, the Unofficial 
members would have to consi- 
der whether they should move 
that the second reading of the 
Budget to deferred until Habl- 
ity had -been assumed by the 
B8ervice concerned for payment 
of__the__compensation__on__an. 


“The cconomy of the Colony is 
tiot self-supporting; its maln en- 
trepot trade ts subject to external 
fovtors: over which we have no 
contro! and which may obviously 
adversely affect Revenue re- 
ceipts.” 


He felt we‘ should 
bear the taxatlon ‘though he did 
not necessarily assent to the prs: 
posed amendments of the. Inland 
Revenue Ordinance as. regards 
personal assessments. He with- 
held comment until ho had studied 
the proposed Bill. 


grin and 


_ . Ha supported the Financia! 
Secretary's view .. that the 
Colony could: not be regarded 
as reatonably -secure untii It 
had reserves ‘amounting to at 
loast a yoar’s revenue. 


If the deficit could. be made 
food by a form of taxation which 
was morc equitable In Ite inte 
dence -and more: gencral its 
scope’ than the taxation’ cee 
the Inland Revenue Ordinance, tt 
was acceptable‘to lm, 


*- Turning to Uefence ‘costs, Sir 
Man-kam Lo sald the cost of all 


Chau: miggested heavier “defence - measures amounted. ‘to 


over 12 per cent. of the total 
budget. 
Hong Kong... 


- The percentage, ‘ne belleved, 
was higher than,any part‘of the 
Commonwealth; and even higher} ” 
than in ‘Britain, “While 


Colony regarded it ‘as. its” dae. : 


and privilege to-play a wo 
part In’ regard to. ‘the’ over-all 
defence, ~ sounitmaats: of the 


equitable basis, or move a vote 

of censure on. Government, or 

take some other appropriate |- 
stop. 

The speaker ‘congratulated Gov- 
ernment on the substantial - re- 
sults of its education policy but 
said the time had -como ‘when 
Government should review. the 
whole question’ of Government 
expenditure on education and d 
elde on the most equitable all 
cation between the Education De- 
partment ‘and non-Governm: nt 
pehoolae ‘ 


” The water situation. was soe 
ous and he wanted te know the 
position in regard to the” Tai Lum 
Chung” Valley scheme. © What 
steps had been taken or ‘were 
mentation of for the carly -aug- 
mentation of the water: supply? 


- He noted. with | ‘regret the re- 
ciuction of the vote for Social 
Welfare. He hoped the'cut would 
be’ restored in a Ceca aieetd 
vote. t iy 


* (Continued On Page: 13) ne, 


This: was very. high tor|. 


The Nérwagloi gstor:' 
: od - through 


or* gesture ' contelbution,, ‘than fot 
-a-ontelbution f 


* Workmen cycling home in the twitight near Hatfle 
aan by the sudden flendiah .cc rcam of the four jets 


a landing, flaps down. 


Ask for.a Demonstration At: 


“ry Kong. ea Ex han 


‘alefistd, England, duck hurriedly,” sur. - 
he De Havilland Comet airliner rosra into 
‘Bhe was returning from. Rome's Clamping after a test Might, piloted by 


_ ace De Havilland test pilot John Cunningham., She flew’ the outward trip In two hours twa 
minutes, and the return flight In two hours 10 minutes. ‘The Comet has just completed a flight | 
to Copenhagen and back at an average speed of 480 miles an haur—-(AP Phod). 

eee 


| Troops, police in 
pitched. battle 
with ‘Malayan Reds 


j Singapore, ‘March 22. . 
Two hundred British troops and a force. of Malayan 
police aro fighting a: pitched battle with Com- 
munist gueriilas three miles outside, Reale 


oe. . 
Trial of 
students 

e'  @ ie... 
in Saigon 
‘~. Saigon, March 22. 
French military police and 
two thousand . ‘Vietnamese 
police. armed with rifles and 
revolvers stood by in ‘Saigon 
today to prevent possible de- 
mornstrations during the trial 
of 12 students charged with 


“atlempts’ against the security 
of the State.” 


Iren chains, guarded by armed] 
The troops." cordoned ” off an creo, 


police, barred: ‘all streets lending to 
the military: court -In. which, the 
trial is being ‘held. »+~. 

THOT stldéhis werd: me! 


Lumpur, NO 


OF the™ Vietmint™ ‘(matlonatlst |“ * 


7 jacernieee organisation and had 

sret printing plant to 

ig out: Vietminh tracts and 
orders, 


The city was‘caim though many | 


arrests were still being made as 
a result of the demonstrations and 
riots‘ last Sunday. 

Several Vietnamese shops closed 
today in protest against the ar- 
rests and all taxi-drivers were on 
strike. . 

Usually well-informed: Viet- 
namege sources.said that a genera} 
-strike -order--would..bo- issued -to- 
morrow. Reuter, 


Court reserves 
judgment i 
Singapore suit 


ingnpore,, March 22.° 
“The Su pred Court foeny ee 
served judgment In the Hal 
case at the end of the second: 
day's hearing in which -ceunse: 
of both sides argued - laboriously 
on_the, ‘legal aspects. ' 

e claimants for _Porséeslon In 
the sult. were the {ted States 
Government .and the defendants 
amed were the chief mate’ and 
aah Captain,. Yang. Soo-nee, 
and the third. mate, Loh Chl-sze. 

e U.S. Government claimed 
the? Hal Heung, one of 40 or mare 
Victory and Liberty’. ships sold 

“the United States to the Na- 

tfonalists, on. grounds “the latter 
had defauited of their - mortgage 
a ‘on 
Tess, 


Segue 


Colonel ‘Kent: 


+. Memo 


: ‘em 


‘belfeved to “be 


the ahi United : 


Ba who ‘wanted ‘to screen the ‘ camp. 


* The engog cement ‘is now bee 
ing fought. ey ‘the viclnity of 
the Christian 4, svomnetery. ~on 
Cheras Road. 

Two hundred: then'of. the Sut.’ 
folks cordoned: off the area after 
the police had captyred three Chi- 
nese, one of whom has been iden 

ed us a terrorist... 
___. Australian. aid... 

Meanwhile, in™ Canberra, -Co- 
lonel W. S. Kent. Hughes, Liber- 
al, suggested in, the House'of Re- 
presentatives today that Austra- 

fa should “send cémmandos to 
Malaya to -help ‘in.the fight 'to 


chieek Commun im. in South Eas‘ | 


Casha Kent Hughes, who was 
taken prisoner. by-;the Japanese 
un the Malayan ‘campaign’ of the 
last: war, - said: Real commando 
units” should .ba-sent .to “Mulaya 
instead of maintaining a force in 
Japan which was 'of'no' real usd, 

. He sald” th ritiih army 

seamed to: be dwindling - and 
» making ¢ the. same: 
‘Malaya 2o° 

war... Brittah “ministers ; seemed 

to be unable to:eee beyond the 

Buex since thé:war. ended. -:- 

Colonel. Kent: Hughes . sald ha 


impression. tHat 
Government, gs-treported . in the 
military ‘ald Uf--an oMiclal request | 
were made. 
‘would - - immediate! 
impression, : : 

“Tho Prime. Minister, Ne 
Menzies, oat iy ected had 
‘| been: mario 0 Gov ent 
but - added: ‘that ised 


. correct ae 


errore. dnj._ © 
lt. did} before the}; 


intentional ‘tha|: - 
o- Australian |: - 


- He asked ‘it the:Prime Ministar | 


Mi finta> raised i raised by 
ue oul cor 


| tor the: British Government “to]’ 


face the realities” of the aitua~ 
fion in Malaya. 

"It must decide. betweon ‘action 
now or.a. war dragging ‘on for 
yeurs,” the newspaper ‘sald... "Ther 
News Chronicle” said ,that tha 
latest evidence from Malaya show- 
ed that the . situatlon,. despite 


oificlal reassurances, is. not got- , 
Route: 


ting -better. 


FA CUP. SEMI. 
FINAL REPLAY 


London, March. 22... 
Thore was.no' score ai 
the end of .90 minutes of, 
play in the Football As. 
sociation Cup. semlrfinal “ 
_ replay toda: Ar 
: nd Chelsea, 


“Strulta “Times! \would . refuse |: 


ate 


New York, March 22, 
General Li Tsung-jen, who 
was ‘deposed by Generallasimg : 
Chiang Kai-shek as. Acting | 
President of China, . told tha: 
Press. yesterday that he ine. 
tended to retyirn to the Chin: 
ese’ maintand {n:six months. to 
assume command of mdré than 
500,000 armed resistance fight~ 
crs. in his native province -uf* 
Kwangsl ‘and neighbouring : 
inces. 
orGeneral Li sald he would: ignore} 
Taiwan. and - concentrate his‘ 
energies on the organising of: 
former Nationalist troops ‘and’ 
spontuncous resistunce groups on | 
the mainiand into‘ a co-operated , 
fighting force capable -of overs.’ 
throwing both the Chinese Com 
munisls and Ching Kal-shok’ 
“Kuomintang “dictatorship.” 
The former acting presidents. 


people. - n 
"Third force” : 

Genoral: Li ‘intimated he tad, 
received ‘oxsurances -of Amerlcart 
support in his campaign to creath 
a. powerful . “ated. force’ in 

na, 
ty said he. was, in constant 
wireless communication with han 
dreds. of. scattered” resistanco. 
groups. thyoyghout -. South Chin: 

and had Jin: Fusted guerilla come. 
manders to, expand resistance a 
tivity by recruiting Iarge num: 
bers” of ° disiltusioned . peasants 
and students .who awalt ano) 
portunity to rise. agalnst the Com: 


| munists. 


General 1A ossericd that a large 
number ‘of Nationale troops with: 


still: .malnta! 


a Sib ta ntact 


= ‘igi al 


“. “Palpeh, March, .22 
_ Shanghai -was dealt. a. fresh 
attack: yesterday by: the Ne-) 
tionalist: - Alr.; Force; _ whl 
again concentrated “ on, th 
Lunghwa © airfleld, despatches -| 
from ‘Chusan land ‘stated tov 


dono-tn 1 provigus ‘raids wos” 
onthe runway &t Lingtiwa, once o' 
busting tn international alrport,. wads 
sald to.be.unuseble, 

The lntestsacsault w was apparént 
ly mounted from Chugan Islat: 
the Natfornallst, blocKade base: 100.; 
-miles South Bast of Shanghal. i 

“Nationalist warplanes, also cones 

tlaued thek: -now almost dally. = 


‘tacks on Communist craft o! 


Red .. mainland. . Turget areas 
ranged from’ waters Weat of. Lu 
chow Peninsula In South China 
those about '75 ‘miles from Shang 
hal.—Assoclated Press. : 


_-Edwara : ‘O'Connor, : Re 
. | Monagor. ... ; ty Ben 


Negotiations between the Philippines A\ i f the: as. Win ing b 
n cae ees ‘ 2 9 ng y djontin on 
as ame a a Gavornme for - Subsidy rater nak zit oint-on- 1b we wy ag 
y the-United States’ a oth East, fe asin ¢ Marino Court of Inquiry to. the vessel's’ 
operatio acted to aie 6 fiaed a eae ee . . Having, Been sot: off i .course by an ‘ac- 
¢ : i : ey ae iumiulation -of d é ea lal std 
within, a fow ep 2 Meni. Me Pal ets = Bs drifts. ea ba unpre saa meters nay ane ‘|’ nawapaper, rst vera today 


h left Hi oe 
Philippines Airlines operates from. London via a fir Pronea ester" This was stated by Mr. F VJ. Skuitil, President of | ta the ie ied eh eal, 


Madrid to: Manila, and thence. via. Hon oluld | day the Court, da 
ite ; eliveri 4s 
to San ‘Francisco as an. international - caytler, r ce ges teneme es Lab o2 Kcrine: Office ey findings fp the. A eu alied (a Shaat 
It also. operates an. inter-island service, swhich ight nd. Mir iW Blogs, tind d that the * dé a |. received” In, Hong: Kong. yeas 
li il of the | ities ¢, Ne the Binh-trlow left the Colony tor stated that the total error of the foundering howved ‘that the price”. 
nks all o e larger’ cities rom ort ern ha was probably magnified by bad steerinig on for. copy, was 8,000 Jans 


igon. yesterday: by. CP. PA. : 
Luzon to: Sulu. . Ba  aninplao, g 
oi NE cancel great can Pay aa the part of the Quartermasters, 


‘ \ ecu as rate, of. cxchange 
i shortly Bangkok yesterday .by CPA in- i tante: fs jo eamo day. was 3,300 Jen 
after World War Il, Philippines ; cluded Mr. ‘and: Mrs, FE, Blake, cotta mister of the ship, st have tints op, the Cont of China ve- minplao to one’ Hong Kong 
| Airlines. haa, operated withput | Mrs, E. F, Guzman,-Mrs. E. 0,| been responsible for an ommis-| trance to the Yangtse-klang and, Dotter. LS 
argovernment subsidy of any }. Mendoza, Mrs. F.C, Mendoza, } gion.in that .he failed, {to avail in, most cases, : the strandings " 

kind, company. officiols sald. Messrs. a nia} Ne Whe a ee R.1 himself of the advice given in. the} would not have dccurred ifatten-| ° 
airmen see. ‘It eatrles mail “within” tho: ts-'} May, and Major, ckliffe.-- | Chinn: Sen - Pilot, -Volume 111,-to} tion had been pald to-the neces-| ~ Violations 


“ CURTAIN | NET 


in ART SILK: lands and forelgn airmail without | 44. p Cas Ibot, Ameri take constant soundings in thick! sity of constantly ' sounding In 
: : li ht Be pay, uch. a & piven, by | at st, aged in. the erica, Jour os pity wentnes on this section| thick or misty weather” : 
other: goyverfmen 0 ..its:inter= = 1 0! ec ina Cons! : r 
or COTTON LACE Rian coal igi iatlortal competitors.,,...1n, addition, terday from Manila by PA. “We ‘are unanimously agreed wi it Coinpanies’ 
ot ts PAL“hos operated: :many.;airports, that Stanley Gilbert Haines must. 


. One of ‘the many. China: Nationa! dlectpline genorally on phones 
tin Aviatior." Corporation » employees |-rroiiitien .within the: istands at * wasenot of a high standard w 
New designs with predomina g -| Who ‘have recently returned’ from | jeg: own expense, oMmetals of the 


“indoctrinution"”.. classes In China| qny bald; 


ps 


Mrs. Aamen Newton Keith, | be severely censured,. but we do 


authoress of “And Three ‘Came not find“{t necessary ‘to caricel or th ¢ t th 0 di 
Home”. arrived here — yestetday | sucpend his Certificate of Com- pains eer Blat’ ped the i mance 


from Sandakan by CPA. She| Setence as Master of a foroldn- Riadig Operator.(The Court at-| our companies were sum~ 


cweattor = -and: communications 


ap ’ 
pastel shades of om | nuld:dhat.’the ‘purchasing “cf: Cam- ; ; "| was accompanied” by her hus- | going ship,” the: Court declared " 
munist. War: Bonds: ta China: had Ble. by dev citations a4: te band Mr, H. G. Keith, Britistr| @r ‘se ‘ying Hing, owned by bilcoasi ponte hien eaprtta -mbnéed before Mr. -Jaines 
GREEN, BLUE, ORANGE : caused many of these employee Sunt chenlee Ince roealenober| Borneo Soyeneent official, the To Hing Company-(Hong| personnel” and obscrved that, ‘Wicks at Kowloon ‘yesterday 
to dislike Ife in. China... «;. . ; io" P Kong) Limited, hit the rocks at) the versel bas, had 17 mastera for ylolat ons ‘of regulations of 


PAL, earned enqugh from: inter- 
“‘Refuning.to give. other reasoner Departures from tha’Peningula 1 bru 12 
why ho: and tty ih em pavonat Pte vas igi paveliia S Hotel on Tuesday included . Mr, conan Taint: aah ‘trum  Amnoy 
; - 
i ployo a cf the avila company ; operations, Devaluation. cut _ Ne eonigite, Fell, Mr. a to one Kong. oe eee tho vessel on Fobruary 7, some ddisiat, 207, Wing tok Ses 
ployee merely’ suid hit they now| , about 40 per cent from passon- well, Mrs, D,A."MacKenzle, Mr. | ¢rom Amey to tho ne, dou vite gre. Wyadgorheg, the Chilang, Tes-beng, Hieuded. uly elaht 
Faves ele ‘ltre et Hin] gy evrton om Itratona | oa ie hie, Ho eaten alena| "he Gate voted tat| some naan eA Ec, 
Chlbias fhe. Philippines Government | A. Moritgomery, Mr. and: Mra dein Aiaoye, th Vessels pasm@ge} tne attention of the auithoritica | Com AT, “048. na tao ty urn 
Due ‘to this reason many re-| oi . + | from Amoy, @. weather wat! i6 invited to tha desirability of| for 1847, 1948, an and fail- 
t d 1 h Ign. | helds 58 per cent of the company | Farmer, Messrs. W. G. Lamb, Ught .varlable winds with cor- ing to hold, a ‘general meeting for 
uurne cmployecs. pave revvon’j stock and the remainder fs pri- | ‘A. Ellery, Ry-L, Costine and iN tlouous. clouds, and occasional) Sal vessel, trading outside) iika 
after thelr return, Set yately jouneds Largest —— of B. Wanamaker, ‘ ‘patches of mist and ‘fog, oly uht Kea eet Tre a ee aie The,Kader Industrial Company, 
. ; ‘* . = 
Others who have no idea of re- believed in The’ hands or Col.} Among those who left. the. een qué: Shinined: dwi chine-und a séuuding. platform. ee i director, “Ting: Talus chine, 
signing, remained with the com=| Andres fSorlano, president of the | Peninsula Hotel. on Tucsday | 4 the Saker rg obtatne Kod na. That Jn view of the, two recent Tour! nes ‘abe aie ; 
pany and are assigned.to diffcrent] line, but no-figures have ever | wera Mr, and Mra. K,.E. Greene, lind was’ ‘sighted. ufter leavin; strandings in ,{he ,vicinity . o 
posts within the company. been made public. . | Mr. and ‘Mrs, R..J. Morgan, Mrs, Chapel Idand until n. matter at Chilang Point the ‘attention* of . 
, Sources said the negotlations E, C. Whitman, ‘Mr, ‘and Mrs. F, fe arta! Before the vessel struck tho Jlydrograprac, Depurtment, 
Yap returns . for 2 Government. subsidy have | 3° Gaunt, Mrs. K. Bumstead, Mrs. chit bd Point." ‘Admiralty, be ‘Invited to tli 
Among th : 1 turned tenn Lhe aa a Mbsldy has. bean U. Barrington, Mre_ A. _N. Atcher,|~ “The evidence shows that no desirability 7 cient 
‘Among the recently returne ecd foro subsidy has been jonyry warnings on the char 
‘| CNAC employees ig Mr. Regine} recognised, but points of difference Mesars. P. Fotok, PR. Wareing, sdundings were, taken ot any;tlmo} jy, - this hy rea. witht a summary 


3 Dilton and a rn Fabian. ing tha [pa Ithough ‘ h 

Yop, formerly oMfcial spokesman{ which are still being negotiated .| Quring  tha'|passage _althou Thats the au ention of the Hyd-| shares an 

for both CNAC and CATC, [revolve bout the. manner of | the everend Father, No Macks Hy iepaea rene Bipasha ‘rorrhphic Department, Admir- ing ee 
Mr. Yap who wns said to have | Paymient. e¢ airline wo! ©! trim, Editer and Publisher of the | are udvised ‘on page 54, lines 2a ulty, Ue invited .¢o, the desiran pigided. ict, 


been “indoctrinated” in Tientsin| 4n arrangement which relieves Py a bility of having o greater over, 
* | returned here about a week ngo.| it from certain toxcs and {ces Cathalle weekly “Sunday Ex2-| to 26, China Sea Pilot, Volume Inp of the constal charts in the | Mons, that, ,belng. ia director fot tha 


: , urni cra | miner", returned by air from|:11--'From:.time to tine. vessels comp, 2 fafled to tuke up the 
; on Trucedoy: lie: reported sel: to Fe ae metina waz | Rome yesterday. ‘hove stranded on out-lylng ‘1s- Tray Shen. ie cout elscal phn “qualification shares, 
Hotel. wenther service to the govern- on record thelr” high appreciation eat taP salcester, of inet Le 


‘As quite -a Jot of CNAC em-| Ment, In addition, it is asking of ‘the fact thatthe: ss, "City. re a 
poze es “Sune, hr | thine ne anda noe: | NNW Barber Wilhelmsen Kine sicei at Godda Ne Bs 
the CNAC workshops.ia Tal Tak immedintely proceeded towards pal Falling chan of a eotuen tor: 


“indoctrination” classes in ‘China,| national routes,—Associated Press, 

‘{alrport have once again become an Ty tee ee Vv { HK ‘ bap, sy 

fog and mist to render assistance. - 
a day grounded aircraft are Rediffusion esse arriving in Tribyte was alse *pald to the ig ade Wicks: ake ee 
belng overhauled, polished and |. id le hi ate ia The Barber-Wilhetmi Li io” Nev Y¥ rh Fe Ec t Ssommtpelnh ofleer tne Masten, By : Th Rutaday. red 
removed to dierent parking oe. | GELEDTALES ten. Lin's New. VorkFar East [cow i puscnsen of a Wind) 


hast chahea ae mea at . Sarvico. (for which: Dodwell and “Compan ing who déd ashore}: 
‘ alreraft has been tested in the air. | annivers ary : Limited, are. Agents i Hong ‘Kong) ay Hog, who were stan éd ashore, ~fourna lists - 


In-Jess than three yesre dnd tho!) the Companies’ Ordinuirice.- 
peagent, master had only joined | ‘The: China Trust Company, 


| ROSE and GOLD 


_ LANE: CRAWFORD. LIMIT D.- 


_ FURNISHING DEFT.. 


OFFICE 
EQUIPMENT > 


‘stitute a: fortnightly ‘service: instead of the Se a a Bact of Poca 


“COMMERCIAL. Hong) PETES 
Moderniae: your office with, w saving -Rediffusion (Hong : Kong) existing monthly service. wen Mp  combciees oe ten a a: for 
. ‘Limi : - ; W. -J. -Shutil, Tresident a 
ot pace and added ee BROADCASTING - eae ees erate te tat ihe | The first vessel on the run, in.addition to the. other | .'X." 3 itasternigh AN’ and ave. fo 
tne Neg NOBLE NATIONAL we IN JAPAN  _— | colony Inst night with nearly ships already operating, is the mv. Fernstream | © Smlth, members | ~ Bani KO Ik i 
xreen, sted] ‘oflce equipment, and note Tokyo, March 22. , | 29,000 listening. scts having expected here’ on April 2.. ' 3 
ite arprisingly Jew cost. Coomnccelah radio broadcasting | been installed, and with listen- : U. Ss ; ean 
: atte Ona Japan erg estimated at 270000, | hie shi delved from, tho/ tne the wesc ervey eck ag Rias eure ‘eit 
Cees Gy Ut She pane ' - | builders , in 5 - ej | Bang! in. 
Gi RA Aw s ; fa tne, Piunister tor-Teleconmuni=; ‘Ger in Hong Kong, fn the course Ler 11049, is a single screw open| Fernatroam is cqutpped with sadly South East As As | Wor way 
é ‘ a The Mi of his speech recalled: to the’ 600 | shelterdecker of 8, ns dead=} telephone in addition to long and Singapbre, ‘Mirch 22: a rch 
_GIELRAR [a ite, “scteay ha | aus Bese gt ti ane | Hea cpaei th, SAH | Sm ave 20 adn| SOME areos ot Seuth ast | he Slamoge fn Which ma ; 
ce _, GLOUCESTER ARCADE, TEL 27017 So bade: eve ee | eration” in” the-Far- East, it has {-hold;-and~a~ long ~forecastle - ex-'} is~arranged ~amtdships-and--con-| eee may... ragtive. American be -hefa-{o. tie. Siamese, cap, seal. ata 
‘ ‘ Lae ee ake: ; ‘of commercial radio stations. P enty af research and experience | tending over No. 1 hatch. sists of two double-cabins -con- within ays, Mr, Robert |.on:May 5. 
onan: re : behind with. it, taining bathroom . and... sitting'|‘Allen Griffin, the ‘head ‘of: the! - ‘They are Mr. John Morley, well 


eam plications rah pe. Bee He gave credit to avery| Throughout tho shéltefdeck.| room, and four single-cabins with United ‘States’ technical, sssist- |. chown Asnerican columriist~ tho, 


starting May 1 if the Brondcast-| member-of tho staff, and sald forccastle, as well as.accommoda=| 9 gofa, all of which have a pri- ‘ance. misi ‘fald a..press con-' “¥epredents.’ some 175 ‘newspapers” 


5 5 forced draft ventila- d toflet ‘in the United States,-Mr. Nornfan 
ing Bit now before'the Diet is| that It was only -by their ditl- | tion, it has vate bath ani et room, ference, hexo, to iat ‘the end, J 
pared. At present broadcasting} gont and conscientious gpa ie oe Boag oh rons Ee the passengers there are’ Aoiton ai {| Beane, fessor tea TA on ae : 
Fe Separate Burney Ge fee | guen more, emeweme™ M8] Sieh spac rods what txolng sons ketal which ce] Bhim wont omni may Behe Carey, Bla pot 
‘|slgned to change this system.—| .."“Every. effort is-being. madd} Fisking Gamage, from sweat andl yory Paes ‘fitted. soured fara fo rould « pass tial ipher ot" : Associated * Press 
5 4 Reuter. {0 dive our subscribers tho pro- | lack of, air circulation. fhe added, Phljdosers coute ues oNME Marly, who Is elso‘a. 
Sia ; grammes they want most; and in’. i¢ hog also, two. compartments \"incluged: ‘ta ithe. category ar ec : Yewn dares, who I the Na 
eee any suggestion | with refrigerated space of 4,250 ‘nomic: su piles, sg. they may ema 
EARTHQUAKE om subscribers org always wel-’| cuble fect cach. Prop Josa’ OF ea ioneay wana i | Saco eae 
f SHOCKS IN PI | that “he hoped to double the. These, reefer chambers have I ‘:y-Mary-Griffig annigunced, that. He From, Sabai, he jell 
IN VITATIC ON Mm, March 22,_|Runbee of snare byte time | not ute teen, “tad tr cree] @ econ | Hi | hasibes tritvgrceramente | o New eth lt 
“A. series of earthquake shocks iMr.. Frank Horne the Mi 7 requiring lower temperatures than Smeat/and .this willbe followed | 2 
tanging ‘from’ feeble to ‘falrly: ‘ting ‘Director, is i be ne ee 30 to, 34 degreés Fahrenheit; tha Ce rm n ‘by ja.full report: : This full . 
bs Be ain the shes strong, sltelched across Mindanao | {0 Director, ls. in. Singapore ot | ¢empsrature’ may, -however, : ba erma y wold be oe te die Ul bets “votoran “y, * 
You are ‘cordially invited ‘ Island ‘tn ‘the: ‘Southern * Philip- ‘auld not be resent. 'Y | eeduced to about 12 or 15 degrees, ve ¢ Stute, Mr, Dean’: ‘Acheson e came from Manila on‘ Tue: 
| Birds Tost ‘night, the Manila: P . - ... Bonn, March , 22. a dlssore, he added. mee | oer ‘ ea ; sisted 
~ ¢ other two! jotiriia ar 


"Tei guests. were treated. to, n| & necessary. 


toa display of. Weather’ Bureau | wos ‘informed 
. an ; film show “The Green. Years.” J..,..2he, “West German Gove .Griffin considere: ndo- 
reps ‘Thote were no immodiate |. cara “and. mahjong games, TA Deeptank ent, today’ hsked''the four o¢- cnn -& bethe tolnty: Ah a trom Tokyo." yest 
~ CH’ ING DYNASTY} : |-dance was later held, with music ‘cupation’ powers to hold. cled- Gea In néed pr bid, capectally, tigen a 
4 “Tho first quake’ was recorded) oviged by Fred Abraham. ao d-|" A deeptonk is fitted In the after Hh Goria: for |.of médical sti g , Norman Soo:ig will ‘proceed. 
EMBROIDERIE: , . ‘at Surigao ‘on the’ North: East | PO Vicp ont Yorchestia. P+) part-ul No, 3 hold forward of. the ‘tons throtigHout Germany for ‘fural oh sapplies la, Motbya‘and Burnin ‘ier 
$ : ee the eeranian et : ca an yet hE ie te i be Sonaldent aasomby. sald thnt FaiWEcon 5 cerenation of thie, “Slants 
> ak ’. - ea ae i" é ; 
ond other CHINOISERIES . ‘ {tent ‘shocks: wera: folt until 0.05 HIGH POST -FOR | 3ootrhe tank ‘is divided Unto ‘he. Geverpment: prapoqed that] 
re ie C .m. local time, when the heavies Fra: 
emo? occurred. This “wie ‘of CHIANG'’S. ‘SON two halves by a longitudinal) Brita! nee, the Sovict Union 


bulkHend ‘nnd ‘fAtted with heating] and: the‘. United : States n should 


F : ie vat this;-- oa i hae intensjty: six, which -is rated Zafr-: Talpch, March 22, colts. In additio: 
ar mn, are two! ciact’ & law to-hold the elections 
Soni saa HOT. 1) doly-cestrang ° — strong.cnough to! Chinese». ‘quarters ‘predict tho | wing tanks in the ag Pe with] under -thé' control of commisalbps 
‘| awnken..’sleeping’ persons, - ‘ring Generalissimo '¢ ‘elder ‘son;' Chiang’ |*y total feapentty: ot 324 ons of of fepresentatives ; ‘of; all four: oc-' 
” RENDE VOUS , 23rd te 25th March: _ | dollacond -swing chandeliers. | | Ching-kuo, -will:get.a: high . post | Revie ye olpatidn ‘powers, ‘or'of the Uniti : M 
ROOM: 5‘ 10 ain, 0B pam. quent iy fougy imger: iota | a x Delence Ministry, aus ioe era cane cating ack fare 
ae an d ; - viper 0 me ‘pholterdeck on ! ‘The 50) Ig, of. the “mati on 600. years vere. 1: afropn 
it | PPRisociated yee peas "| Protning and: = mm Depast-| otsthe:cpgine roomn/casing wi El catatulele sab for, all Gor | fhe zresidence Af <astichh Bu 


" lon: Depart= of:'8,870. cuble fder.' y © ‘Government's view,| Kawa. o wealthy stock compa: 
mont. Tho ship tins, 10 three-ton: der id et ‘etablisy a German ae Aniablya, near oe, 


dh 
icks: with three-to! inches r i a 
‘ GREEK. SHIB STILL 2 | elahe five-ton doris aches 8 wonalitulo mi we ua be uh natn clon am ari 
7 y in wipe C5. 18 Wi one rs 
Manila, March’ 22. }« oto-w =| Nee erntah tand suriard end et ' is : | aetolipd bx. rain t0e, 
een: a i , 7% 0. $c} =! i f : : 

PS ong ven ee Sail nie cue | dersicle..af, the filter: nd of ES a gt. Be of: sSapanese de . ort aided 
Ghar of Loyte sites Sunday, ald 4 hitch. With (double: tackle, gt -personal. palltip “anthoritiea; feat, Ri Sore 
‘foday that’ Manits "salvage firm’ Mirch, 22 | beeen the wo, five-ton: devel. rsedair -the. bb melted. down, | & i tf 
has in Peigol lis yes B- |. Meg, evi JPM at Die forward: cad of Nona). (tee sain “yee «2 by the, burglars-eReuter. 31 saasurE 
ae in aaa Bet to: vess : y . ively. 


Fetintat fee re essa BE ay economdel: conena| By: Pouce: aha tit kigapore, Murch. 22. 
hry Ba fab tas aval 18" copies | 7. 3 ; bo 'gyararitesd by ally ea toe : oni me eres i na ; 
“Cexerht, tise! cUpation; owersrand: wate ger An Alor 7 
il cotta th RR eee eau acl Uade scan eee | ee A cua 


rot. the 


Supplementary appropriation. 
_ordinance has, first reading 


mY 
Seog 


The Ordinance to authpriso the appropriation ‘of 
; a supplomentary sum of $30,135,964 to de- 


fray tho charges for 
March :31, 
* Legislative. Council. 


‘| The. Financial Secretary, 


Today ~ 


Kowloon Rotary Club, luncheon 
* at Peninsula Hotel, screening 
of films “Aquopolse", Libera- 
tlon of Rome”, 12.30 p.m, 
Nine Dragons Services Club, Hong 
Kong Band Cali (ist ° Bn. 
Royal Leicesters), 8 p.m. 
HK Women's International Club, 
Whist Drive for Servicer, 
7.30 p.m, . i 
European YMCA, Guest Night, 
Concert by Band: of South 
Staffordshire Regiment, 7,30 


* pan. 

Brittsh Counell weekly film show, 
“Universities”, spenkar: Prof, 
J. E. Driver, Helena May 
Institute, 5.30 p.m, 

Y’a Men’s Luncheon, Roof Garden, 
HK Hotel, 12.30 p.m, (closed 
meeting). : 

HK Singers rehearsal, St. John's 
Cathedral Hall, 5.46 pam, 

Kowloon Union Church Women's 
Gulld, whist drive, 8 p.m. 

Cheero Services Club, informal 
dance, 7.90 pan. 

Francis Wu = One-Man_ Photo+ 
kraphic Exhibition, opening 
by Governor at 1,30 pn, 
217A, Prince's Building, 


Coming Events 
TOMORROW 
Kowloon Reel Club, End of Sea= 
‘son “Informal Dance, King 
George V School, 

Nine Dragons Servlcen Club, 
Tombola, 8 p.m. 

Organ Recital, St. John's Cathedral, 

“ ' 415 pam, 

Women's Section 
YMCA, Beginner's 
moking, 10 -aum, 

SATURDAY : 

Kowloon Gramophone Society, 
elusileal concert, Diocesan 
Boys' School, 8.15 p.m, 

Race meeting, Happy Valley, 2 
pm, 

Nine Dragons — Services Club, 

‘'"Tombola, 8 p.m. 

SUNDAY 
Toc, H ctassicnl concert, 50, 
> | MacDonnell! Rond, 8.30 p.m. 
HK Art Chub, sketching party to 
Shek-O, members to meet at 
Queen's Pier, 10.90 a.m, 
European YMCA Armchair Group 
meeting, address on “Combat 
against Leprosy" (with films) 
by Dr, Skinsne: » 8.30 p.m, 


HOt eee 
Pigeons do 


‘an 8-hour day 
By-ALLAN J. RANDS 


' Birds— or at any rate 
racin g-pigeons—work an 
eight-hour day, or something 
like it, 

This is one of the discoverics 
made by Dr. D. H. Wilkinson, 

- physicist, of the Cavendish La- 
boratory, Cambridge, and Mr, G. 
V. T. Matthews, University zoolo- 
aist, working together on research 
on_bird navigation. 

One of _ the. problems.—which. 
scientists “wished to solve was 
the tlme spent by a homing bird 
in actual flight on any Journey. 

Homing birds have been fol- 
lowed by acroplane, and the 
method has also’ been tried of 
Opplying a piece of camphor to a 
bird's wing and 
fighting-time by the amount of 
camphor evaporated, 

‘Now Dr, Wilkinson hns con» 
trived a very ingenious little box, 
which he fixed to the wings in 
the course of experiments with a 
couple of dozen racing-pigeons. 

This minfature box which Dr, 
Wilkinson describes in today's 
Nature, consists of o source of 
alpha-pariicles—in ‘this caso the 
rnaloactive clement polonium — 
with o specially prepared Pphoto- 
Sraphie plate opposite to it, . 

When the bird 1s at rest a steel 
ball, falling into a slot, prevents 
the alpha-rays from reaching tho 
plate. But when the bird is in 
Mght the ball rolls away. 
recording on the plete shows the 
time the.bird has been in filght. : 

“Roughly,” Dr, Willdnson told 
me, “we found ‘that the homing- 
Pigeons were jn the air for about 
eight hours'a day during August, 
when the sun is up for 16 hours. 
Our experiments are not yet, 
concluded." es aes 


FORTHCOMING 


European 
Dress- 


estimating the |. 


The,| $800 


Counc}l_that the expenditure for, the 


1949, passed i 


tho financial year ended 
s first rcading in 
= pd 2 i Seale a 

. S. Follows, told 
year 


stare 
rC. 


1948/49 was estimated at $150,284, 105 but 
'< the actual ‘expenditure wos . $9,669,918 in 
excess of. the estimate. 


This over-cxpenditure wos, 
almoat entirely. the result of 
the payment of occupation 
period pay. to membors ‘of the 
Government Service who were 


Breviti 

The master of the ss. Tal 
Chung Shan, Archibald Henry 
Bathurst, was ‘fined $100 for 
fuiling to produce a complete 
Nst of passengers to the Im- 
migration OMeer and failing 
to produce the passengers for 
inspection and interrogation. 

Before the Justice of Peace 
Court, Bathurst plended guilty 
and sald that the ship arrived 
from Holhow with a large num- 
ber of cattle and that the pas- 
sengers were cattle thinders 

According to the prosecution 
the ship arrived Jn the Colony 
on February 5, Bathurst made a 
report that there only flve poa- 
sengers on board. Later it was 
found than 19 more passengers 


were on board serving as cattle 
minders, 


o ° . 


Miss Helen Hindmarsh ree 
siding at Repulse Bay Hotel 
was summoned before the Jus= 
tice of Peace Court for falling 
lo notify the authorities of o 
change of address. ‘ 

Mr, Strellet represented Miss 
Hindmarsh and pleaded pullty 
on her behalf, She was cautioned. 

According to 
Miss Hindmarsh, an American, 
arrived in the Colony on Nov- 
ember 16 last year. On Decrem- 
ber 13, she informed the Imml- 
gration OMcer that she lived at 
the Peninsula Hotel.~ 

On February 24, the Immigra- 
tion authorities found thdt Miss 
Hindmarsh was not living at the 
Peninsuln Hotel. . 

It was found loter that Miss 
Hindmarsh had changed her 
address to Repulse Bay. on .Jan- 
uary 31, 

° 8 . 


Two.unemployed men, Chun 
Slu-wah, alins Chung Ting-kwal, 
und Au Shu-fong, aged 20, were 
committed to stand trial by Mr, 
James Wicks at Kowloon yester- 
day for -the possession of arms 
and ammunition, | 

Chung: was olléged to.have had 
in his possession a Mauser pistol 
and five rounds of ammunition 
at Nga. Tsin Wal Village on Feb- 
ruary 12, while Au was alleged 
to have ‘attempted’ to sell two 


| Smith_ond_Wesson..revolvers-and. 


20 rounds of ‘ammunition to two 
Chinese detectives in disguise at 
Li Uk Village, Shamshulpo, on 
February 19. 

Detectives Bub-Inspector P, 
Lowe and E. P, Grace conducted 
the cases for the prosecution. 


Caught smoking o cigarette in 
court while a session was on, 
‘You Ming, o apectator, was fined 
# by Mr. F. X. d’Almada at 

owloon yesterday, 


On a charge of housebrenking, 
Law So-chung, rickshaw puller, 
was sentenc to thre ths, 
imprisonment by Mr,. d'Almada 
at Kowloon yesterday. a 

Defendant tn the carly morn- 
ing of February 13° broke ‘into 
the India Bazonr, 65 Nathan Road, 
and stole clothing materials and 
ornaments to the total value of 


On two charges of conveying 


‘}dangerous goods and operating a 
{junk without. a 


Ueence, Tam 
Kau-sing, 20-year-old Junk mas- 
ter, was fined $150 by Mr. F. X. 
d’Almada st Kowloan, yesterday, 
_, Defendant, was sarrested by 
‘Sub<Inspector Nippard at . the 
19-mile: Castle Peak beach on 
Monday, loading 40 tins of petrol 

8, Junk, °; ¢ : 


on to hii 


Fur . Coats, 


with - 


“4 


’ Protect..your 
Suits, 


1 
d* Sweaters” 


the prosecution, |° 


not interned, of on increase In 
.the. cost of living allowance, 
‘and of a number of outstand~ 
ing adjustments following thé 
revision of salary scales. : 

The appropriation ‘of $40,135,904 
did not mean thls sum was ac- 
tually spent but merely the total 
of excesses on the different heads, 
and If the savings were taken into 
account, the actual over-expendi- 
ture {s ‘only . just-.more -than 
$9,500,000. As ; 

Security moasures 

Council also approved two sup- 
“plementary approprititioas moved 
by tho Financint Secretary, one 
for the firat quarter, and one for 
the second quarter, for the year 
ended March ‘31, 1950. 

The Financial Seeretary ex- 
plained that all the larger items 
were connected “with security 
measures, ‘ ¢ 

Mr, J.C. MeDouall, the Acting 
Secretary for Chinese Affairs in 
place of Mr. B.C. K, Hawkins on 
Ieave, was sworn In as 1 member 
of Councell yesterday, 

The Ordinance to amend the 
Revised Edition of the Laws Or- 
dInance 1943 passed its second 
and third reading in Legislative 
Council yesterday, 

Two amending’ ordtaances—the 
Ordinance to Amend the = Air 
Armament = Practice Ordinance 
1949, and the Ordinance to Amend 
tho Defenee (Firlng Areas) Ore 
dinnaee 1930,—were reud a first 

me. 


ARABIAN NIGHTS 
WEDDING 


A wedding—Morocean style 
—will bring back memories of 
last year’s “wedding of the 
century” when at a cost of 
£300,000 the Caliph | of 
Morocco married a Princess 


cousin of the Sultan. : 

Now this “Desert Song” coun- 
try is preparing a spectacle which 
will eclipse even the “Arabian 
Nights" — and.perhaps even Inst 
year's wedding — for sheer fan- 
tasy. The ocension ‘will be the 
marriage of Si Ahmed El‘ Glaoul, 
son of the famous Pasha of Mar- 
rakesh, to 2 daughter of a Moorish 
Caid—one of the most important- 
men in the Moroccan administion 
and nobility. ae aes 
_ Since both bride and bride- 
groom belong to the most famous 
of: Moroccan families, the order hag 
gonc out that no expense is to be 
Spared, no luxury considered too 
Breat, for the occasion, All 
pashas and caidas (judges) of 
Morocco, the nobility and the 
kentry of the fabulous Shercefiian 
Empire, -the- princes -— of “the Sul: 
tan’s blood are expected to attend, 
According ‘to Moroccan tradition, 
the chief guests as well as thelr 
families and servants will all en- 
Joy the bridegroom's hospitality 
for howaver long the celebrations 
may Jast—and that, in Morocco, 
may mean anything up to six 
weeks, . 

Already, writes Allan Roy from 
Tangier, gifts are pouring into 
Marrakesh from all over Morocco 
and composers and pocts are 
writing music and verse in honour 
of the marringe. 

1 of which indicates that in 

Morocco at any rate,’ there Js’ no 
such thing as. austqrity! an 


: 
Movie ‘bull-fight. 
The film ° industry, 

Spanish film indus se Be 

rate, ..has been turning ifs 

cameras on the world’s most 

Gontroversial “sport” —bull- 

titite tron Ma 


were to be 


on the life Romero," 


nm 1771 
5,000 bulls. 
mero” was 
the camera- 


Yy,. $0" thi 
much ‘asthe 
In. a matter. 


aati 


ae eer 


. 


‘The sensational new: discovery — 


A?) ' ma a BS gh a ‘ 
Troops of the 42 Commando Royal Marince In. slow tempo, marched past the Brigade H. Q. dn 


Kowloon yesterday where the elute was taken by the GOC-In 


C'Sir Robert Mantergh. The in. 


spection- parade took place at Chatham Road, attended: by # targe gathering. Sean, coming part: ~ 


the saluting base In the picture 1 


—(‘China Mall” Photo). 


GOC-in-C inspects . 


the 42 Commandos. 


Thousands thronged tho 


strccts and windows of 


‘ Kowloon yesterday as five platoons of the 42 
‘Commando Royal Marines swung into Nothan 
Road ofter giving the salute to the GOC-in-C, 
Sir Robort Mansergh, in a. slow march past 


at Brigade HQ. 


The occasion was the inspec- 
tion af 42 Commando Royul 
Marines by the GOC-in-C 
Hong Kong, and the parade 
took place at the Merchant. 
Navy football ground, Chatham 
Road, before a large number 
of distinguished guests as wel} 
fas the local public. : 

Dressed in jungle green, the 
commandos assembled at Whit- 
Meld barracks. The green berets 
trooped down Austin Road, led by 
the bands of 3 Commando Brigade 
and HMS = Kenya—attired In 
jungle green and white helmets— 
and’ formed on the football 
Rround under commanding om- 
cor, Licutennnt Colonel I. H. 
Riches, ' 

A general salute was given by 
the men when.the GQOC-In-C 
arrived, and, after the inspection, 
fired a Feu de Joie to the delight 
of hundreds of school children 
and spectators, 

The parade then advanced In 
review’ order and gave -the gen- 
cral salute. After this, the GOC~ 
in-C proceeded by car to Brigade 
HQ jn Middle Road. ban 

The crowd followed os the 
parade. marched down Chatham 
Road. Arriving at Brigade HQ 
the Commandos broke into slow 
time and in column of divistons 
. marched past the saluting base 
at Brigade HQ where Sir Robert 
took the salute. : a ® 

The parade then swung into 
Nathan Road, resumed the normal 
tempo and marched along Nathan 
Road back to Whitfield Bar- 
racks, ‘ ' 


* J 
_Thousands watch :_ 
The whole parade was watch- 

ed by thousands, Road blocks 

+ were put up by the police as 
the parade took up the full 


Guests included the three ser 
vice chijefs,-Commodore Brawn- 
field, and AOC A.D. Davis, and 
many high’ ranking officers::of 
the three ‘branches, Present also 
were a number ‘of Royul Marine 
oMlcers whose dress ‘uniform 
singled them out for favouroble 
comment by many watching the 
parade, Among them also were.a 
few United States Marines off- 
cers who turned up in their own 
dress uniform, . 


Mental health 


The age-old ‘saying “proveri- 
tion is better than cure” is com- 
ing Into its own ogaln—this timo 
in:the World Health ,Organisa~ 


tion. : ; 
rl wl aa i 
cerned only with physical health, 
Mental health, claim. tho’ W.H.O. 
experts is almost’ as_important. 
‘For’ this’ redson' the: Health Or- 
ganisation’s  exccutive Board: at 
the Palais: des Nati in Geneva, 
suggests that every Public. Health 


taken i Department in ‘every’. country 


should, have 
section, 


i tend. to 
¢' them 


Congressman 
crabbed over 
crab meat 

Washington, March 22. 

Representative Russell Mack, 
Washington Republican, asked 
two Government agencies %- 
day to And out what Great 
Britain traded to Russia for 
80,000. cases, of canned’ crab 
meat. ’ : 

Mack said that the crab meat, 
44,000 cases of which were landed 
at Boston recently faa shipment 
from Great ‘Hritain,.was canned 
by Russians and had been obtain- 
ed by the British in a barter deal. 

Mack made his ‘r:quests [a 
Ietters to the State Department 
ond the Eoonotie «Cooperation 
zeassntlons which he made 
-public.. 


Mack wrote ECA adminiitra- 
‘tor Paul G. Hoffman, “tf be- 
Neve Congrass and the country, 
‘because of atir heavy American 
contributions to Britain through 
ECA programes, have a'right to 
_know what goods the British 
aro supplying to Rusala.” 


In’ his letter to Secretary of 
State Dean Acheson, Mock sald: 

“They cople of the United States 
are now ehgaged’ in a cold war 


with tho Russian leodors....It t 


seems unthinkable wo’ should per- 
mut Russlan goods, produced with 
slave Jabour,.to enter ‘the United 
Btotes ‘to cémpete with the pro- 
ducts of American Igbour, This, 
it seams fo.me, fs. particularly 
true of such'an item as carined 
crab..." : : 

‘Mack asked Acheson to find out 
from the ‘British whethor they 
trade to the Russians “anything 
that would add to the economic 
strength or war potential of the 
Communists.""—Assoclated Press, | 


Colour 
ites roe oe! 
television 
Colour television — TY.'s 
latest attraction—is causing 
embarrassment for the experts 
in’ America.’ ; 
‘Tho embarigsment, writes Kay’ 
Murray, ts shown on the tocen ot 


soine ‘of ‘tha. country's top-tank- 
ing television scientists, .. For the 


oe 


! jon tna 
indter ‘of Kh Uitte as 


80/-, i 


Tho: colour . tolevision.ibroad« 
. the ,eloctrician ‘yoceived 


je “A Troop of 42 Commandos led by Lieutenant D, M. Trace, 


‘* " 1 

Two sentenced 

in forged 

notes case 
For having: in possession 
4.675 . forged: 10-cent — notes, 
Yung Wong’ and Wong Sany 
{ Were given five years and three 
‘| yoars ‘hard labout, respectively, 
by ‘Mr. Justice Gould, Senior 


Puisne Judge, at the Criminal 
Sessions yesterday. 


Wong Sang, who. had pleaded 
guflty, asked for leniency in view 
of his plea and the fact that he 
knew he had done wrong, Mr. 
Gould told him ho wan satisfied 
with Information obtained that his 
part in the erlme was only as a 
carrier for the forged notes, 


A jury of five men and two 
women unanimously found Yung 
Wong guilty on two counts of the 
Offence. 


Mr, A. Lonsdale, Crown Coun- 
sel, assisted . by Detective Sub- 
Inspector J, Martin, prosecuted, 
The accused conducted his own 
defence. 


INDIA-PEKING 
TALKS COMPLETED 


6 . 

New Delhi, March 22. 
- Negotiations -petween Indio and 
Communist China regarding tho 
exchange of diplomatic relations 
are now complete, a Forcign 
Ministry epokesrian - sald. here 

Wednesday, « ! f 


He added that aoccording to 
present indications, Sardar M. 
anikkar, India’s former Ambas- 
sador to the Kuomingtang, is 
Crpectod to be accredited to the 
Peking Government; : 


Press reports quoted Panikkar 
as saying. in Bombay that’ he 
expected to leave for Peking in 


wo wee oclated “Press, 


SWANAHIST 1S NEW 


L 


SKILLS COLDS FAST 


It. uses’ a revolutionary anti-histaminie miracle 
drug plus three other proven medicinals, Together, 


these four ingredients pct to pravent the formation 


‘of ‘excessive nose secretion—reduce “sneezing, 
coughing and fever—relieve headaches and-mur- 


cular aches and pains. 


SWANAHIST IS EFFECTIVE 1, 


In U. S. Naval tests, 90% of colds were stopped 
completely when this new treatment was started at 


the first sign of a cold. For. 


Swanahist offers quick relief. 


SWANAHIST IS FAST-ACTING ! 


hay fever, -also, 


Many experience relief in only 20 minutes.. Use . 
Swanahist promptly and cold symptoms usually - 
disappear completely in an average of one day, 


SWANAHIST IS SAFE 
Even for Children! 


The U. S. Government ‘has approved its sale to the... . 
public without doctors’ prescription. For best te- 
sults, take Swanohist at the first sneeze or sniffie.. 
A bottle of J2 tablets is usually sufficient. Swana- 
hist is sugar-coated—easy to swallow. For sale at 


all .drug stores. ; an 


a 


=, 


A 
and easy 16 swallow 
| Ab All-Drug Stores. 


‘ 
ne 


‘THE DAZZLING : 


HEALTHY-WHITE 


a 


pie OR Baie ee 
PEPSODENT SMILE! 


nie hie.: hoimesmade. |" 
-broadcastes 


‘By’ filen 
Pepsadent clean 


\ 


ki 
an 
ie 


4 


KAN 


iecines 


\ 


sili, 


Tablets are sugar eoated' 
( 


via! 


\ 


UNION 
BLDG, 


Pore @ ym ->- 


“CLASSIFIED ‘ADVERTISEMENTS 


: 20: Words $2 for:1 insertion 


sar of 


i Pant 
‘ 


“spurs movement in U.S. 


Se Bi Dick Tuptier 


yee a8 


$1 for avsny additional keaeition ton | Nomieis iQue g “eal ; See le Rouyitngt thee Cea 
10 cents :évory. additional word peor insortion 8, given that] “f men” ane Id gm Puen eines a at an} ‘ . 
“ona eta sre 18 en ieee) “FOR World government ee 


BIRTHS, DEATHS, MARRIAGES, PERSONAL $8 per Ineortion | registration) will be held at.the 


; : New York, March 22, he 


of 26 words, 26 cents every additional word per Insertion. Hong Kong Hotel, Hong Kong, Poe ce Te Noy as : ~ ——_— | 
Clasatfiod Advertlsamonts, accepted up to 5 p.m, for publication oe ay aah mately toe i The: Now. York :Times reported on Monday that F 3 Plas s 
_tn the following day's papers A ee receiving the Repart of the |’. ../ DF: Hartigon Brown of the University of Chi- Cc art bd : 
Repiles for the Following Bo Nos. are awaiting collection. | Directors, together with -the| ~ . ~¢ago,-made a’ speech here: on Sunday night’ |" 
Pela ahh cl tht ta aN ttn 


Statement of Accounts for the |” | warning ‘that he ‘was. convinced .that men |  @ambermiac. 
Dee ese ee etober, 1049, |". would use -the hydrogen bomb in war even continues. 


. ‘ : 

1 Wb rded to the Advertiser If requested on | and to elect Directors and ap- | : 4 | yw. 

tho ebitaoe ‘form ich should bear thelr names and addresecs. | point Auditors, ; . theugls they know its use would destroy all 
: Sife. 0 : noe 


The. occasion was a dinner held at the Waldorf 
~ Astoria ‘Hotel under the auspices of the “Writ-. 


crusade: 


“Washington, Match 22. 


The Transfer Books ‘of. the 
Company will be “closed from 
Thursday, 9th: March, 1960, to 


A cultable announcement witl be ineerted Free of Chargo if 
Advertisers’ requirement: are satiafactorily answored. : 


. . | Friday, 24th Match, 1950, both} © 4, oe ‘ Senator Joseph McCarthy. 
tinge thelvaiver” , . @rs. Board for World Government” with the: |.wisconsin Republican, was re: 
‘LOST FOR SALE path . aa : aim to further the cause of World government ‘|ported ‘today to have told 
JOHN D. HUMPHREYS & | “and: to ‘prevent-‘a third world war. enate Communist ‘hunters 
LOST Kal Tak Alrfield tdentifi-| SHORTWAVE enthuslasta recolve SON, LIMITED, : as Phra : / . .:. that. he Believes the Federal |, 
cation Permit No. 4034 fanued 10 worldwide. station to hele heart General Managers. Dr, Brown is’ one of. the [ed and meantired the. electron and| Bureau of Investigation trail- | 
Bs Brnith hereby declared. nv ae the Keranaing tmm-| Hong Kong, * » Jleading atomic’ ‘xcientists , in | opened ‘the: way for present-day|ed ‘four Soviet spy suspects to 


: Sa te i 

Dated this March 3, 1950, | | this eoupeyy and. AE Ms tesalled | Sele feseneeh, obdenveds..” © 
opinion : 

in a radio programme about a| yy qth a the tals aboutthe 

ydrogen bomb, -I'm not ye 

month ago ... that. ..hydrogen | . “convinced that it's at ail cereal 


contacts with un American he 
accuses of heading an esplon- 
age ring... 


“McCarthy's reported * testimony 


oe | portant wavobands. 6 valvos In- 
LOST Kal Tak Identification Per-| outing RLF. stage. Handsome 


mit No, 4084 lesucd to P. Holden) veinut cabinet; gold metal grille; 
hereby declared null and vold. argo coloured dial. Damonstra>|” 


tion without obtlgation! Colontal ~ ..., ...Jbomb, if developed, ‘could ex-|  w, bultd tomb. Of 
SON VACANT. | ee eee terminate most, If hot all, the| course, itt were ‘possible: to| Suu 1s, coved, session of 
Road. Phone 26310. Wee’ i world’s population, ‘make tha hydrogen In all the a 
Peet cmnsigr epee mares te NOTE CE ree Dr. Brown may ‘be right | 0 seas combine at once Into committee, Democrats seid he had 


—___- roduccd no primary |: 
CAMERA “Contex"” 1:31.56 F=6cem i wrong, but the fear-or apprehen-| helbum, wo probably could’ x+{ avidence. ala . BE ie 
man by 1/1250, Blue tens, Reasonable] HARRY WICKING AND | “fon held by the American peopl: plode the -whole earth: and . 


denler. Experience, not necessary. |. ‘ a towards a new war where hyro-|  transfo t Int i 4 1 lor war 
Shanghol dintect preferrable, State price, Replica to Box 575 “China COMPANY LIMITED, 0, ransform | oa nebula ‘Yhe Wlsconsin Senator -war 


To PIG, UL PAT. OFF. 


Mall.” ren bombs may be used by both} sald to have agreea there that hid Sa ee ne Sears : 
silury required, Apply to Box No. antagonists is very real. And It ir] “However, I'm still sceptical. 1] accurations that the State (De- “This new auper-calculating machine is almost humaneit 
676°"China Mall \HONG KONG FILM ND COMPANIES . through these fears that vorious/ think it would take a warmer] partment fs hurbourlng © Come Aer vee just fired’ ths ‘thea vica-president!” ta nee 
BEWe REPORTER -wanted: for a} A (RE-CONSTRUCTION movements ond. organisations ad-|tady than mother carth to make} munists largely will stand or fall d : : : ‘ 
hota Opanieg alate: IF qual} See outlets a eee OF RECORDS) -. vocating -formation of a . world such a horror possible.” on this case, : : —_, 
fied and experlonced news Re-| Book Stores, Newspaper Sellers, . ORDINANCE 1047, government are lately gaining » at 82, Is known as the 


The individual involved was ‘ — 
identified by .McCarthy as an p ‘ ‘ oe 
aMMate of the State Department. TI ee Mer ee 
He furnished the name df a man TEA cae 
to the sub-committee at yester- , : BRIDGE 
day's closed session, 7. : boat e : taal 

Chairman Millard ‘Tydings, By ‘Shepard Barcla y 
Maryland Democrat, of the sub- ‘ , eat : . ; ewe aa ‘ 
committee looking .iuto  Mc- : “Tho Authority en Authorities 
Carthy’s charges, told reporters i seo a Nt 
that the group already had re- 
ceived the name once before from 
McCarthy. : 


; : popularity in the United Stntes. | “billion-volt sparkplug" of ‘the 
HARRY . WICKING AND The sponsor, of the. Sunday} Callfornia of Technology. “a 

COMPANY LIMITED (here- night | inies, tg “Writers Board ANboughh. he aeeed as chalr- 

; a *y | for Wor! jovernment"” [s an or- Man o @ school's executive 
Air Mall giving detail of XT ‘iveq edition) at $3.00 per copy. peatee coed Nena ganisation formed last July by 17) council in 1945, he still maintaing 
perience, Salary required to pot) obtainable at att Landing Book! preoeiati 1 ing, to | American writers including such{ a pace that would kill many o 

Box 250, Kuala Lumpur, Malaya, Stores and “China Mall" Office. ssociation and ts proposing, to | internationally known writers a: | younger man, 

oe i addpt a New Memorandum of | mr. John Hersey,.Mr. Robert F[' He addresses -the faculty of 

Association under, the  pro- 


WANTED KNOWN’ [scrieatinG PADE—100 page| visions of Section 9 of the |Dorens ” “™t MF Carl van) Presno, California, State College 


Doren; at noon today, then flies - back 
at 60 cents cach, On aale at 4 
“China Mall” Omics, Windeor above Ordinance. Most of the Americnn oranisa-| here to attend’a dinner party. 


fons pushing the world govern) | Millikan observed: 
House, Tol, a2312, — Copies of. the proposed New 


porter on Staff of a Seading Eng- | Cinemas-and “China Mall” Office. 
lish Dally Newspaper, in Malaya. 


Bingle man preferred, Write by SHINA MAIL PICTORIAL (Re: 


“VISITORS In transit. and RE- 
SIDENTS homeward bound, We 
have the newest 1950 range of 


WHEN’ FACTS ARE NEEDED ( The. key bld at’ Tablo 2 was 
‘WHEREAS, the side which be-| the third one made by East, who 


ment movement are related morc] “We may be lost If we fall to 


SEE NE ee 


Fancy Worateds, Serges, Velours, Memorandum of Association | or less with the “World Move-|/muintain the American. way of : : ‘Joomes the declarer doesn't Iike| had bld spades first, then. din- 
Dress Coating, etc, at reasonable . may be Inspected at the | ment for World Federal Govern-| fe against Socialist trends which} ‘Tydings sald the . Wisconsin| the opponents to hnvo- any more] monds and then rebid: his ‘spades, . ° 
prices, thapection Invited at Company's . Registered ; Office, | Meat" which hag its headquarter: | threaten our personal freedom,’ | Senator offered. “no. primary} information than po-sible, .therc| showing: that they were longer 
Eastern Overecas Go., Room 40%,) ~ Prince's, Building, Victoria, | (0 Parin and has os its presiden'| | “We must make it very plain to) evidence" to back up his charges,|are times when it'is necessary to} than the --dinmonds, though: the 
Tet. 28352 ; SALE OF CROWN LAND] Hong‘ Kone during ordinary Sir John Boyd Orr, The American| Russia that we ‘will go ahead! “but did suggest ‘wo investigate | exchange as many facts as pos-| latter sult was,a  four-carder. 

y i : * “ | stganisations have as their mem-f without her if she won't join with| in certain places whero he said] sible, In order to reach. a souns'| That enabled West to choose dla- 


Union, Building, 21 Pedder Btreet, 


business hours. . 


RENOMMEE Dresses have beauti- An auction sale of Crown All persons who wish to raise 
fully cut gowns for larger figures,| Land will be held at P. W. 1.4 objections to the proposed New 


ters people from all walks o'|us in this Ideal, Above all,. we 
fe, such os former gavernment]| must be too strong to be attacked, 
oMeclals, diplomats, military men | pacifists to . the contrary," 


he believed evidence might be 


deelsion as to what should be the 
obtained." ° - : 


declaration.’ There is on big dif- 
ference between that and the giv- 


moandg_as, the declaration. East 
was clour-hended to refuse to 
reach out for five-odd, as he, had 


' . . 
604 Victory House, Wyndham 8t.| Headquarters on Monday, the writers, university presidents and} Associated Press, , . FBI files ing: of superfluous ‘information| noted West's effort to sim off 
(Just ‘pant 8.G.M. Post ldo.) | 27th day of March, 1950 at 3| Aref mnterent ieemaities oo Bee reneerai -, Conmessmany ana) So ie “ [hea one pariner hag learned thr / with, the heart rebld on, his #0¢- 
Tel, 38643, 3 p.m. ‘ : such objections with the Re-'|and ‘Republican, parties, . Inbour wae auvinen that Mecatehy thee picked. om ae ‘ em : onrhere wos another advantage to 
DRESSES and Blouses (all kinde| ‘The area which- comprises| tistrar of: Companies, Hong | unlon leaders, ctc. In the United Be) ers referred the committee to the} °° SJ51043° - East's 3-Spades call, - It indicated, 
of materials) at compatitive prices! 1.400 nquare feet is situated| Kong, on or before the 23rd { States, they work to secure Coa- ey Phas FBt tnvesNoation. files, it warl : + '.} not too gently, that if West, had 
—from HK$23.00 up, satisfaction | it pei Ho St., adjoining, Gay of June 1950. fessional: support for resolutions t d understood Tydings trying} 6... Soke any kind of qualified stopper in 
Guaranteed. Inspection ‘cordially fie ry, 3574 (West side) and ath cutlining thelr programme. : - $en ence \to arrange for committaa’ mem- ; the unbid clubs East might be 
Invited at Long Kee Ladies Tallor is suitable for reside: Gal pure All persons raising such ob- ihe by eee beri to look at these files, along| S °7° : P interested fn No, Trumps. . ‘That 
31D Nathan Road Kowloon, . nual pi jections should also file an Atlantic union ‘Five robbers who went ‘o| with the State Department and "was a lot sounder than what the 
SC: r 

| poses. ; address for service within the nen ; if y rob an opium divan on January| lvl acrvice loyalty records, |° 6.4". ones Pee eee paar 
. Further particulars are avait- | Colony of ‘Hong Kong with the ae a eoaniea, 16, but who lost heart and ran |. ; pi Lea ORL =# : 
POCOOOOSSPOSSSSOSOOOOHS | O11, fron the Governme | Registrar of Companies, tlona few THE" Atlantlo Unior | aff when a woman in'the house 75 _ | clubs In 5 band with, no” Lr ene 
: Gazette of March 17, 1950 Committde.” tt'was organtaod IN} chouted . for help, were given t : culotly trickful sult to Tun, . 

y - : arch ify , ar EACONS March, 1949, with the twofold! yong Inb Rays ; HLA . | waving no club’ strength; proper- 

' CLASSIFIED from the Crown Lands &] |. . Solicitors , Programme of: -(1) supporting ubour * terms at” the DQ72° . ‘/ ty. showed. diamond preferonce. . -* 

: Survey Office. ; for Harry Wicking & | Patification of ‘the North Atian-| Ctiminal Sessions yesterday. CJ432, Siac al 
ADVERTISEMENTS o ‘. oven: or Harry Wicking tic Pact, and (2) ‘of Introducing] , The Acting Puisne Judge, Mr.) — McCarthy's friends sufd he fecls _N : 


‘ th-Soutl 
to Coogross a repolution callin: | Justice Scholes, in reply to miti-} s0 sure the FBI files will reveal ore ae icra 


Company: Limited. 


HA : RAS ; hat‘he has called “jarring” ine Ves! 
; ED AT THE Director of Publit Works. upon the President to cat) ¢|8ation pleas for leniency from| w Wert 

swinoN BOOK svont, 26)%ong Kong, Maxch 62-1090 = _seowenton gt tha sourtrice that posse lok are remand eam cpionge ie st tei 

SWINDON BOOK STORE save ae . epenuore’ the PASE to Tou eect the ‘prioncre SoU nea] wil Co ieake Sea's eat ine 


NATHAN ROAD, TEL. 59327, 


‘thought of them before commit- 
ting a crime. ° 

Chan Kwong and Hung Kwat 
were found. guilty of altempted 


Ameorloan States, 


It has os {ts two'vice president 


: ate 2 _ NOTICE 
DOPeosoorOverrorerrrere . —_—_____ — Mr, Will: Clayton, formers Assis: 


more precise . and 


ee us CHINA tant Secretary of ‘Btate, and Mr | Tobbery with . aggravation by a sound’ the bidding was at ‘Table 

CHEN KEE Stamp Exhibition at! SALE OF CROWN LAND TERTAINMENT AND] Scbert 7. Patterson,” former jury of six men and a woman, 2. Tt was mae by giving e 

Hotel Ceci! dally, March 18th to ; —N R 3 Sceretary of War. an permanent to three years each. nico Uttlo plus score to East for 

26th. coral auctlon: rebel An auction sale of Crown LAND INVESTMENT - ; Bae ey PR eae eri eee ae svn iad planed: auly tie making -hia A Dlamonts right on on8 

om, Catalogue avaliable grain! Land will_-be- ~at-P.-W.-/N,-| —--——-. -—}° eaeereanamen (| pemeial 6 ff — World -.; eralists,'- [- pea ctrl otek Rs dle Recah e-head,-1 only- “=trlede fm i ey, eee tenet 

at exhibition roome. Head healer pty Me i heres CO.,- LTD: which alms to transform the cach -In “clubs,” hearts ‘and dia (Dealer: South. Neither” side 
rn | OF th day of March 1980 at 5 NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN Unlted Nations ‘into a world session: of siven fe smut on. nf in ramnds, ‘The No Trump game ef-| vulnerable). * oe | 

FOR HIGH Class Stationary ang 9 409 Cc “\ | federal government, ‘A bill spons] ctrokes, Te "Hing, aged 18. waulé: fort'at Table 1 was beaten four! If. South nover .blds' anything 


printing matter, VISIT CHE SANY P.M. : that ‘the Sixteenth | Ordinary 
General Meeting ef ‘Sharehold- 


sored by the organisation to tricky following:a lead of. the| but spades, what are North's cor- 
seek its development “strengthen cone ot peer cbrr imag mrean ae rect blds-on this deal? |; 
tne We diveuapeutt ae co age. He tov had pleaded guilty to ut _. 

pone ipa a hae already been, operated robbery and possession 
ni ui into ie Congress. 

Fifteen state legtzlatures have al- None of the accused wan legally 


oa ‘s eae . : rer nora } es eke 
ted, Mr. q F; e ‘ a, as 
ready supported a plan to call al Geurcl  aantiog tor Bese ahee A BRITISH CROSSWORD PUZZLE:. :- 


& CO.’ Importers & Exporters Th whi h 1 J 
Paper & Printing Inks. 68 Des carea which = comprises | ors will be held at the Regts- 
Vooux Road, at Pel Ho “St, naieiate? | tered Ontces of the Company, 
ns 9 ’ 

LADIES, wo have at your setvice] NK.LL. 3571 (East side) ond ang eo mane ieee oo 
au spectaiized = operations = for) js sultuble for residential pur- { March 1050 at’ 12. o'cl ak 
Holeno § Curtiss, cool =Wav9Bs! noses, : ° a Sines ock 
machinoless oll porma, halrdyce @& | noon, to receive the Directors 
manicuro—ROSE MARIE Seauty!’ Further particulars are avail- |Report and Accounts for the 


‘° va 7 | 4 eat, set , 


convention to amend the U.S.| Sub-r tor Davies, je} 
Constitution ts allow U.S. partict- Srineidant Bengerriedl tack 


The -ineldent concerned ' took 


warlour—Phone 60384—43. Han-} able from the “Government {year ended 3tst December 1040. | cneion in world government. In| place at 2 : : . 
kow Ad. Kowloon, : ‘Gazette of March 17, 1950, of #to clect Directors and Auditors | tuentiat groups lke tiie American Kowloon, wich Wan tuk acae ee i : 
PEKING ART RUG CO, 22tA|from the Crown Lands -&{and to transact such other | Veterans .Organisation, Frrmers| opium divan, Three men who a a Poyt et : 

‘Nathan Rd, Kowloon, seit ex-| Survey Office, business as may be properly | Union, United Automobile Work-| followed the keeper of the héuse if : | A Ee 

clusively carpets and rugs. Please me : transacted at ‘an Ordinary |rre aad Young ‘Republican Na-| in the evening,.- produced guns, Bo Ee os 4 

drop In-and have a look. E. A. BOYCE, - Gencral Meeting of the Com- |“lonul Federation have isupported| and were joined by ‘several athers 


pany. . : this plan, The organisation Js re- 

e : ‘ : ported to. have more than 40,000} the house. ; 
porn or ingrowing toenail when al Hong Kong, March 8, 1950. AND NOTICE IS FURTHER | dues-paying members. .|.- A woman however tet out: ar, 
vielt to Beten’s oxpert chiropodist HEREBY GIVEN that the Re- | Anather organisation working| alarm, and the robbers ran off and 
oan put you right? Consult Beten’s : gister and transfer! books of the | f° the world government is “The| were eventually arrested, 
Beauty Salon, 1st: Floor, Exchange ' Company will be closed. from Citizens Commltteo: for. United} . vos wis 
Buliding, ; the 22nd to the 31st “day of | Nageg iis fcrmttcre eh counts) 

‘x ret’ Pa 
be setlvithed Rugs, ven y March 1950 both days inclusive. ae Sroupe \ taf othe Arveriean WOOLLEN S 
oteaned: in your own: home by : 4 ‘gion, Genera), Federation: of , 2 : . 
modern, convenient DURACLEAN NOT Ice me F barter = kK. SUN, ets Clubs, bar’ assocfations,! tats t 
BERVICE DURACLEAN COM.-|-. * . ‘ ceretary. 1 [ete .. It proposes tmmediate re-] WE EYY SHIPMENT =. 
PANY, DEERFIELD, ‘ILL. UGA. THE HONG Hone Ko! March 18, 1960 | Vision “of. the United Nationa]! 7 "". Seth Beda ; 
. Agent: George. Lin) @ Go, 202 KONG SPECIAL | Hong Kong, cr ol fh Oo” [eltarter to abolish. the-veto, to ban} © JUST ARRIVED 
Bank of East Asla: Suitding, Tel: CONSTABULARY RIFLE. : = Sa _..| the armament .raco.and.to create] ' te onan esis 
24408. 3 ; , : & REVOLVER CLUB apa) Weer ; a 8 ea oe police foree,’ Whether}. - A: J 950 


Director of Public Works, who had previously been inside 
WHY LIMP about with a palntul ‘ ” 


: in ‘ a. Pa 
a : 2 a 


4 
. Hy BI, 
Bead 


REESE coum, 
IN Se tet ats era 


, organtéations ‘ean achieve] RC ATE 
hing to proniote world peace] NEW BTYLE FANCY: WORSTED 


: ICE OF REMAVAL || itains to. be seer’ But the fact/ SHIELLANA LADIES PAORIC 
NOTICE OF REMOVAL remains that they fiaye*come into]. : ae 


CARPETS, & RUGB--Genuine 

Peking and Tlartein, ‘lovaly ~ 
ans and oclourings, various al. 

some and Inenact at The Ohine| Arthur Morse’ Challenge Cup 


Members are. notified that 
the revolver shoot for the Sir 


. «Rug, Co, Kayamalty Bullding, ath] Will be held at “the - Coritrol! ‘negsks. “LO.AND LO, - By hack of “inv ceenalble aed 7 at eunoe 5 
Floor - (Orposite Hong -*Kong} Police. Station gymnasium on - ""Kollettars, ote. °'. | workable plan to proyent ‘another! "  PLANNEL 
“Hotel) Queen's Read, Central": | Runday 28th March at 10 am| |. AONPNORB: OM | ar, and. that. they Will continue!” “VELOUR 

——— Particlpanta-are requested tol Have Rethoved Thelt Office’ to | t? attract supporters until such.o|"- ~~ GHEVIOT 
“DANCING ‘LESSONS... be Present ‘not later than 9.45 i SER 7 plan ‘Is iachiaved into] " OREGB COATING : 
nae pee | AM  t ee QUEEN'S BUILDING, | | Pract! ut Sc eae a 
: 7S 2ND-ELOOR, f° 1. ve LADIES 


'M, GOTFRIED | 
wo. Hone Secretary. | 


“ICE: HOUSE STREET | 


ae STRIVES CHE 


ROOM NS AGT ARON RLNG. 


a Nase, “s ie areas fa e - 
“ [THE \CHINA MAIL, THURSDAY, MARCH 23,, 1930. 


OSITION TO) cones 
|: Copenhagen 
tyes Hattiald) March. 21. Pe : 
Britaln's "Oe... Havittand | SHOWING TODAY At 2.30, 


Comet—the ‘world’s first all- 


ates 


1 tes he 


COMMENGING TODAY. ,AP £30,,529). 


COLLEEN TOWNSEND - ALAN YOUNG 
& _ Deectad by GEORGE SEATON * predseed ty WILLIAM PERLBERG 


‘Wititen for the Seesen by Gorge Seolon and Valentina Davies 
from the Boge Pay by Julive 2, ond Philip ©. Epstein And the Book by Rosemary > 


BROADWAY ADDED: LATEST FOX NEWS 


—-—. COM 


Thero aro ten races, the Firat Bell. will be rung at 1.30 p.m 


|| NATIONS |- 
| TO. MEET |, 


* London, March 22, 
The Finance ' Ministers of 
tne 12 Atlantic Pact countries 
will meet here on March 29] -° 


to discuss the financial ahd : Barlier, the -Prime Minister 
economic effort needed for on} had ‘forecast a new. Coalition 
integrated defencg’ system for |-vithin hours. : 
the North Atlant area. :- |’ Meanwhile, the Sociallst_ Mem~- 
; : bers of Parliament -announced 
Announcing’ ° this date “ the /that they would Iead “Stop Leo- 
4 Treusury added that.the Mar- |pold” parades In the Industrinlfsed 
shall: Pian roving ‘Ambassador |South on Friday; when 300,000 
Mr. Averell Harriman, will pre- | workers stage a. second. onceday 
aide, over ie. athering. | a * 
ir Stafford - Cripps, -the ana Perinat 
cellor of the. Exchequer, will re- ba babe bas would lead 
presen ritaln. 
The Finance Committee advises reidleal arbre ide a et ae 
the Atlantic Pact Council, . Loopold’s. restoration. ; 
Since the Committee first met The ‘Socialist Members of Par- 
at December, dean abe {lament also today gave 100,900 
financial and economic require- Belgian francs to the fighting 
on he North Atlantic de- {@und of the “Stop . Leopoid” 
premts: Of Action Committees formed by the 


{Once programme.: 
The first of a series of mect- |Party, trade unionists und other 


ings of the Weatern Union — and | Socialist, supporters. 
Atiantle Pact Military Defence| The ‘tense Inbour altuntion 
Committtecs will begin’ at Tho Jcased a little today when Ant- 
Hayue on March 23, culminating | werp dockers and 10,000 Brussels 
tn a meeting of the Atlantic Pact | “Stop Leopold” strikers returned 
Detence Ministers on March 32.| to work, But, Council employees 
The five regional groups off in four boroughs’ of the bilingual 
the Atlantic Pact have - been] capital began thelr own strike 
drawing up plans for. the de-}and tramwaymen also threatened 
| fence of their regions, The talks |a walk-out. - . 
Ne at, The Hapue will seck to co-or- Rumours that the Walloon se~ 
dinate regtonnl plans ana study | cinl organisations have. decided 


we 
. their practicability. ; to link up with a “Free Wallonia” 
The Foreign Mintsters of the| movement, to set up o separate 
: Atlantic Pact countries will meet] autonomous State, caused a stir 

: Jater’in April or May with the today. 


result of The ‘Hague meeting be- 
lore them,—Reuter, 


ILEY - CELE 


- Spaak’s advice 


« it . M. Joeeph Merlot, formér 80. 
[ clallet- Minister and a Walloon 
CHILD ACTRESS feadar, sald that applications to 
‘ Join the: new movement --are 
é Ft ’ ‘pouring In from the’ Southern 
NEAR HYSTERIA’) eevee 3 
. , of rtop: 


The growing threat "1 

pages is causing a run on. {co 

A Holly wood, ret i ar shops'and some shopkeepers have 
minister testlficd today] sold out thelr tinned stocks. 

that he once suw the child] ~ Workers are today reconstruct- 

actress Lora Lee Michel bruised ing and redecorating’ a wing ‘of 

and on the point of hysterics. | ————————————_ 


FINAL SHOWING | 
_ at 2.30, 5.30, 
7.30 & 9.30 p.m. 


THE 2 ‘The Reverend Elford Sundstrun . i . a 
Verret uf Burbank was the first pro- . Bi at oo: 
data secution witness In the trial ‘of Jotos rt ayn.s 


, aa 1 Mrs. Lorraine Michel, aged 45 wat 4 
MONSIEUR | on inet menuoeion| © offer von 


ey ee _VINCENT’* because she was growing too bly : aa 


i for: film rolese- a 8 ye 
.THE. LIFE-OF -: Lora Lee herscif was hidddn ir 


7 . an: office ‘in the court  bullding|: 
cit NER Ge” during -the morning session, ther 


appeared at lunch time and poser 
ACADEMY AWARD FOR for photographers, sitting on the 


BEST FOREIGN FILM, 1048! | witness stand. : 
STARRING: “The minister sald he saw Lore ing the ; proposed 


PIERRE FRESNAY Yee on December 15 in the oflce Payments Union, ~ 
of her dramatic couch and calle The offer was put Informally 


the deputy sheriff to examinc ina 15-pago document to delega-} 


with ENGLISH SUBTITLES her. tions of the Organisation for 


“She was severely bruised and 
on .the point of “hysterics.” hd tie Economie. Co-opera~ 


MENCING TOMORROW .[ said. "She had black and blue] “A, omeial ofthe British dele 


; Paramount’ Presents 

GARY COOPER” in” CECIL B> DeMILLE'S 
“THE STORY OF DR. WASSELL ” 
: IN TECHNICOLOR. . . Ye 


THE HONG. KONG JOCKEY. CLUB 


- NOTICE TO MEMBERS 
FOURTH RACE MEETING 


Saturday, 25th March, 1950. was atways becn—neutrality.~ | cumulations of Sterling. 


marks on her arms. shoulders gation sald today, ."We simply 
teel that ‘the currency which car= 

z : ‘}-riés-—50—per-cent of -the—world's 
a trade panne be treated on ie 

same basis as a currency. thal 
SWEDEN WOULD finances trade in a particular, 
FIGHT country, say Belgium or Greece.” 
ee eae pout attan cri- 
Stockholm, March 22, | Ucal of Britaln’s caution in come 
‘i mitting ‘herself to’ European ar- 

If Sweden is Involved In a.war rangements because of Sterling 


dgainst her will, she will ‘defend ‘ 
: Arca Implications, have ‘not :yct 
her independence to the utmost.| oo ctad ta the- proposal. : 


Seer tian desired El M. Britain's objections to | the 
Forlan policy apecen today. | SRE Gg inight lose Kod or 
But her policy Js the same as i dollars to ‘countries with large ace 


Meanwhile, the 18-natlon’ Pay- 
ments - Committee of the . OEEC. 


“warning” strike against; ” the 


the Royal Palace at Lacken, out- 
side Brussels. : 

M. Eyskens told a Press cou: 

ference that his first task now 
will be to study the cémmunique 
just. issued by, Liberal Members 
of Parllament. Asked whether 
he plons an early Sp to Pregny, 
near Geneva, to mecl King Leo- 
pold, he replied: “No” - 
..M.. Paul. Henri Spank,  Bel- 
gium’s “former Soclalist Premier, 
tonight nppeated to King Leopoli! 
to send. back his son, Prince 
Baudouln, around whom all del- 
glans rally. 

tn an open letter published in 
the Sociallst “Le Peuplo”, M, 
Spank adviscd the King to stay 
away and be content with the 
poral victory which, according to 

. Spaak, the referendum on the 
question, brought him.—Reuter, 


| ‘Workers 
to boycott 
ceremonies 


Nairobi, March 21. 
The. East African Trade 
Union’ Congress’ Central Coun- 
cil has confirmed a decision by 
1,500 Nalrobi workers to boycott 
the. town's civic: weels ¢clebra- 
tiuhs which begin on Match 29, 
und during: which the Duke of 
Gloucester is to present a Royal 
Charter creating Nairobi a city. 
. Makhah Singh, Indian ,Gencral 
Secretury of the Congress, muking 
this dnnouncement today. claimed 
that the. Ccngress, representing 
Sive cf Kenya's 13 registered tric’ 
unions, has a membership ~ of 

12,0000. ; : ; 
The Congress’ Central Council, 
today, declared 


ly Tay 
Tho 


{t.would not enhance the goo’ 
name of the African in Kenya, 

Momo Kenyatta, African lead 
of the ‘Union, is reported to have 
accusad the .Congress. leaders of 
causiig mischief by . advocating 
the move. 

Usually reliable British source’ 
here do‘not believe that the .boy- 
cott will interfere with’ next 
wegk's' celebrations.—Reuter. | 


KMT GATHERING 


_ back fo y,in thebe hours and 
-' 29-minutes-fying-time. The - 
normal: time for the route Is 
about ‘seven flogre.” | + : 
Five. days ago the. Comet— 
the “plane of; the future”— 
average 440 milea’ un hour on 
a record. roundtrip of under 
four-hours to Roma and back 
sto Oritain. Today's average 


ae. oe y ne | Hn et epgen n 


*, speed was 480:miles'an hour.’ 


The Comet did.not break a 

+. record today—becpuse there 

In no offictal ‘record for the 

London.Copenhagyn filght—— 
Router. ON 


i cay 


‘RUSSIAN 


DEMAND | | 
ff 


IGNORED 


Washington, March 22. 


The United States is ignor-|, 


ing Russia’s demand for the 


trial of Emperor Hirohito as a|~ 


The  Sovie amnbansndor, Mr 
tO ushkin, pere 
eps: the Secretary of 


war a 
y \cheson, on Feb- 


Jipy' 1\mperor. Mr. 
Panyushkin/pryscnted ta 22-pagc 

th indict Hiro- 
mbér ‘of Japanese 


doks later, the 

ta We not even an- 
muUthoritative source 
taf i! ‘Btates' will prob- 


Btétes: bflafals belleve 
the Sovibt move was Intended for 
propagunda and not even 
Russians expected much else te 
result. |; a 

Mr. Panyushkin accused Hiro- 
hito and Japancgo ‘army oMicers 
of using ‘germ ‘Warfare against 
Sovict and ‘Chinese : troops in 
Manchutla diring “World War Ll. 


They were; accused of spreading] “ 


cholera and’buboni{t plague. .- 
American).officials said Russia 

{s welshing ; on. .avJohg-standing 

agreement.to end such war crimes’ 


trials in‘ Japan: All: the coun- 
tries that fought Japan agreed ‘on 
¥ebruary,,24, 1049, that no more 
maior war crimes trinls would ke- 
ging. . 

Only the 


fought Japan, can rescind the 
id Russia -is boy- 


CADOGAN TO : 
— PRETIRE «=. 

‘ lendon, March’ 22, 
Sir“ Alexander Cadogan, Bri-+ 
taln's “perfoct’ diplomat,” whose 
suave hatdehitting specches often 
annoyed, thé Soviet delegates,, is 
tetiring. from( His post as per- 
manent? British; representative on 
Council, ‘the Foreign 

ced today. : 
ex, who. is 66 this 
42 years in. the 


Nations,’ 
t Lor. 


hedd ‘of; the, 
the Big. Foy 


Conference. ihe 
Reuters"). ", 5 my 
“al 


“Ernest 
SE ere tgte at 
, nisters' 
Sain if 1946..— 


7 


Jar Eaatent’ Commis: ; 
sion,. composed of ' States that). 


NG YUEN SO'* HUNG, BALL: 


Al Truly Great ;Young ‘ 


Al. 


FRANK MORGAN ‘ 


y wae 
A TRUE LOVE STORY TO 
TAKE TO YOUR HEART! 2 


Sl a ln Ln 


CAKE ANY EASTERN TRAM.CAR OB HAPPY. 
SHOWING TODAY at 2.30, 5.30," 


REAT STARS TOGETHER :FOR, THE 


7.30 & 

ieee Auine ‘ON: THE SCRE ; | | 

— # TIME FROM THE WORLD. FAMOUS. STAGE PLAY, * — 
“THE WET: PAINT”: 


:. DIALOGUE: IN MANDARIN. fol 
«KUNG-MINC 


and the First Race will be'run at 2.00. pum. under. the. Chairmanship of, M. Pp R . 1: 
“Through Tickets (10 Racce- $20.00) may be obtained at the Se te cinieal cueeilern: N SINGA 0 E ‘ Wek 
Office of the Treasurers, 1at Floor, Telephone House, also tickets for |- j ‘ 1 ut 
the Special Cash Bweep on tha Hongkong Derby (over 260,000 tickets : " 
disposed of to data) to be run at the Easter Race Meoting In April, 
1950, which may be-purchaegd also at the Club's Branch Office, No. 
382 Nathan Road, Kowlapn. : ‘ : , 


“day began a bor considera . aA 
: lon: 0 c rinciples « : e t. if ion 

. : ‘ | Union. Thelr work is expected to] Singapore, ‘March 21. . 
17 Hankew Road.’ Kowlood, go on until June—Reuter.. , -'| ' Three hundred Kuomintang|* °°" oe, 
(By Popular Demand) Scaccae . *..! **: | gnembers and other'pro-Nation- P. 


‘i ‘alists. held. a dinner ‘tonight in 
— TODAY ONLY — jiy celebration .of the ‘resumption) ° 
. Pleaso Note" 


There wiil be no Spoclal Sweap on tho fast Race. 


"Beason tickets an 


Change of Showing Times 
2.30, 5.00, 7.20 & 9.40 p.m. wrens oe 
The most, widoly-read and : SHOWING TODAY. * 
‘discussed novel of all. time. - “SPECIAL TIMES: |< 


AtR~ CONDITION 


' 


LOREVER Tur ia 
° WAMAN 8 
t] vieltors Introduced by him, and for : ene 
ambirs’ Enclosure will, NOT be on sale 
las Office will: ctose at 11 em. and'the i . 
, Both Offices -at ist Floor, | “| 7 ‘y 
# pine: witi' bé. obtalnabte at the Club {> f FORE |' 
j 


ered In advance from the No. 1 Boy i 
AMBER 


polostire-fé-93--Including~ 
able ef the Gate...>: 


Beton Date 45,718 &'045 B.D. 


AJES TIC |Wegeee Siete hae 


.. In; after-dinner speeches, moro 
than a dozen speakers, including 
a woman, reaffirmed thelr sup- 
port: for the Nationalist " govern- 
‘ment,.:and . bitingly © denounced 
Mao; Tse-tung, Stalin, dnd cyery- 
thing Communist.-. 0; : 
*-.Chen’ Kwok-chu, a member of 
@. Central “Execullve ‘Committee 
of. thd Kuomintang, sald that ite 
aly 


Elabora' 
Sp 
firs 


PAW CRS 


VIWE CA 


.. . 


\ 


a ve, Grneres 


Spa wike tak tag err ue ne ae tea 
One of the principal changes artance: ' of!': the éonifctenee, {sfmldjic of thid century, . Orig et 
gine E P ne well i the fore-facntiat fact abs&t the Common. 


in Commonwealth affairs in - 4 
saat 1D « i It,[s, the cap; botwepn | wealtit is that !ts nature la,chang-j - 
in the Jast:10 years, hgs- been } omctal - action: and pantie eh a dng ccnstantly. Such mowanieus Pa 
the giving up of the old) lédgo whith, these unomMclal ‘Com-| developments as ‘the, ending {of 
system, of formal Imperial | monwealth Canterences moy Qepal the Biitish Empire In India, and 
Conferences. In, thelr, plage fo.fill. Delegates ¢9.tham; repre-|¢he nécessica of India, Paklste;| . 
have come the informal sentative .of- national. viewpolats, sind. Ceyicn ax Voluntary member | 
ratings Cominonvatth| SihadP Re fahigae Sie | Rn wan” cag Se 
‘Prime Ministers. These are - ; ea ant iraa Comino 


apebises 5 q in. the whcele. Commonwealth 
being supplemented by meet- ttructure, , But it pcoved hard for 
ings of Commonwealth 


the deiégates to deflac the new 
Foreign Ministers; the Co- meaning of the’ Conimonwealth. 
Jombo Conference .was_ the 


The dlscustion {s, summarissd in 
first experiment in, these 


fis report as follows, “An“Aus- 
‘trolfan said we know .bilndly,-or 
foreign policy conferences. 

It in generally agreed that busi- | 


rathcr;, we’ {ecl, that there | ls 

something pecullir sind, we feel 
that [t js worth while. | Any at- 

nese is much mere effectively and 

rapidly handled at these informal 

meetings than jt) was nt the 


tempt ot. rationn) anatyais might 
Claborate comferenees of pre-war] conferences suggests where prp-| the introduction of perplexities 
udvantage in the new system. however attractive sup {ally or{ clatification was quite unnocts~ 
The informal meetings do not] excellent In themselves, are not} eary. Fat them the Commdn- 
net the sane. publicly, as did] practicable becatise «they ore not/ wenolth was on association jof 
the old-fishioacd Imperial Con-| fh accord with the gehéral sense | States (which outraged ol) ‘Austin~ 
forences, such us the Ollawa Cen-]2f fhe , Commonwealth.» The C 


D alth. - TI fan theories, of soverelgnty, but 
ference, This has been com-| things may help to explain. why,} did work. Its members passcss- 


ed, o relaticnship which was "These two plotures, mada at. ihe epenthy of the Spanish ‘act axtilbtitenn “Ini Calro ahbw | 
t Yochisne, At left.Io Princess’ Falga, cleter of King 7 -o 


ee : 
—— é Ree are, 


By WINDRUSH: 


—_—_—_ ! a 


responsibiftty for+ decision - and| create diMculties and misinter~ 

policy. Free discussion at such} prctations ond mipht even lead t= 

days,,- . press .may. uisefully be mode and{ that should not be there.” But 

There {s, huwever, one  dis-| warns where. new. departures, to others this shrinking {rom 
c 


mented on by the Conservative} at a {ime when conferences are 
lcuder, Mr, J A.’ Butle He| sencrally at a | discount, — the | variously. deseribed 3 resembling two Egyptian Prlricescea wearing clrall { | : ; 
“Little mews er ating} fourth in the serles of unofficlal] that of a family or a club. They . Farouk, nnd at right Princess Nazi! Bhah; wite of -Printe Abdel “Wdnelin, “a ccurin of King °° ” 
stings: of the hid in common‘a liberal demo- Both Princesses wore the new high upstanding bollar: ahd: hate worn on the back of 


Cum-| Commonwealth Rejatlons Con 
ferences wis by general assent 
claimed the most suceesstul.” 


(rem. t micatiasy 

monwealth Prime Ministers has 
reached the public In {heir varl- 
ous coynt: There is therefore 
‘areal danger, that the metamor- 
pheiis which hog tuken place In 
Commonwealth . tions may not 


Jimmediately available 

erotic’ etiiic based upon ideals of the h (Acsoctated Prefs Photo). . 
free diseussion, penceful charg? ‘ . 
nnd gradualism....It was the 
tease of community which gave 
Commonwealth meetings an in- 


dimacy . ond ense _ of dIscussloh 


~NEW ANGLO-EGYPTIAN ~ 
NEGOTIATIONS HINTED 


: at the better storec. 

One of the matin alms ot gthts 
Bigwin conference. was t> ‘tafe 
stock of new developments, and 


* Sole Agents: 7 | be fully under If this were| Present the pleture bed poate hy | which ‘could not be found In the 
.- : to happen, the magnificent spirit ie ommonweaith in e} United Natfoos or the Council of 
D. B. SPARKS Tel: 1255 : of frlendil which prevails and| Shape. which it bos taken In the| Europe,” 


, 

the desire work together muy 
gnanr zs either fritter away or be wasted." 
. Fer thore people who are got 
in polities or in’ the elvil service, 
It is hard to diseover what is hap- 
peniag In Commonwealth, affairs. 


, Judging from the report, it docs 
not seem that anything yery ot}- 
ginal or unusual or controversial 
was propounded ot Bigwin. i 
was agreed that the effect of tho 


. "London, March 21. - 
Extrome caution wos preseived today both at the Fordign. Offico Gnd at 
the Egyptian Embassy on tho noftite of the exchanges which took 


Deniocratic 


It has been, suggested that the poet: : new status of India, Pakistan and, cine pererre anor 

fenernl publle in the | Commons : Ceylon was to shift Bastwards the place this morning when the Egyptian. Ambassador, Abdol Fattch Amr. 

wealth Knows rather less about : ine . _ | baiahce of power in the Common- : ree taa h . 4 ta a M Emost Bi fare SA sicy 

the structure’ and working of the ie thdt poetry is any wealth: at was perce yo ba : Pasha, called on the Foreign Secke' ‘ary, y.. Ernest Bovih, co ‘ rey 

Commonwealth than it kaew af man’s business—eve i SS aks a stake to try : ; Pel ee Pre tte ree a oa 
go. ‘There is great iness—even ari. Erh-}) oe ure a common foreign policy] Spokesman on both sides were uhable td disclose whether the Arribassador,, ..” 


duzen yea 


need for publicity or defence policy by all the mem- 


Commonweiulth — not for con-] ° w; ‘ un! +} bers of the. Commonwealth. “it 
sumption abroad but for poneetie Satchara Hughes reveaia | WO8, saunders to admit open dit- 
consumption Inside the Common-| that diligent efforts: are. being fereaces of opinion (in foreign 
wealth, : .'| made by the Imperial Houschold policy) than to attenipt to reach 
ne of the hest ‘avnilable ii] {9 boost. Emperor Hirohite asa | skFeement on n- single Common 
struments for spreading know-| democratic poot—with,the huma- wealth policy which would of 
Jedge nbout Commonwealth] nitarian qualitiés of. an Oriental | Mecessity be so vogue of to be 
atfairs is the periodical uncfMficial] John Masefield. on “4 quite ' unsatisfactory....On the 
Cita other hand, recognition of the 


peror’s—comes froim Japan. . : : in” 
cea who returned last week to London from a two-months”’ stay in ‘Cairo, 


had breached the question ‘of negotiations for ‘a "new Anglo-Egyptian 7 -_ 
-agreement to replace the Treaty of 1936. : : . wee ge 


It ts, appreciated by observers 
here that, in the light ‘of ‘past 
negotiotions, which were at 
times prejudiced by premature 
publicity, both parties are like-, 
ly to be reticent during the 
preliminaries’ of any renewed |, 
conversations. ; ; 
The lotest available informa- 
tion from Cairo shows two col- 
tradictory trends, First, that the]. 


about the 


The Talkoo Sugar Refining 
Co, Ltd. Is pleased to 
announce that the popular 
JAIKOO HALF CUBES 
are.again available at all 
in. the conveniont 
artons. 


Encvallas ‘for  Quaiity, 
Purity and .Whiteness..... ; 
eee at a pince with the improbable critics to even higher. praise, is the 
Make YOUr | Ook MuGne ; scunding name Bigwin h]fact that the Emperor has .ap- 
uses HALF Dominioa sent a very distinguish | Parently no thought “of reward 
: cd delegation of political leaders] When writing his poems. ° 
. und- experts. These conferences pee 
pass no resolutions and formulate 
no policics, The delegations re- 
preseat nobody but themselves. 
For this very reason, discussion 
is much freer than would be .pgs- 


“I write for .; the’ sake ot the 
Great Art" he says — and can 
only just be persuaded to accept 
complimentary copies of. his 

! sa 


conferences on Commonwealth <a “3 . General a 
affairs which are organised by§. So far the efforts., seem; to be impossjbility of achieving a single . ; 
the Institutes of’ International] succeeding. _Non-stop during the | toreign policy did not preclude aro : 
past few weeks, lterary, ,critics | agreement upon the importance of Ss r e ca 
these conferences. The first took plauding the Emperor's contribu-j forciga policies. Such a purpose ; 
place in 1933, The most_recqnt tions to one of Tokyo's most high- | might be the defence of free in- 
was held last autumn, in Cannda,{ brow «magazines, Inspiring. the} stitutions and the democratic way 
new Wafd Government ts ex- 
be helpful in deterring on og- het ai é. 
ae ie it was clear. that sup- Italy's Communist-led Cen-| 5 ot oit on mutually *. satisfactory 
port excited-for such a common tral General Labour Confedera- corms A hata 
el : tion (CGIL) today called ‘for Secondly, that, the, Govetnment, 
ry \ Sales : i 
me Kenneth Whickry, 
cone United opinion. ment police mearures. one ec ae ‘the ‘recent Nobréska; mato the tement 
i i ae, eR Bes cae The CGIL's Exccutive instruc. | General Bisco. in.a.speech prepared ‘tor delivery : 
sible at an ,offdal conference) Nor fs the . urge, for,.,.wrlting ted its Secretariat, to decide «on One sugeestion<made, by wall- ” . 
cussion roamed over almost every] those J : lgéns on his return to London} a, Republicayeffort.’to minke’: a” 
in Japan who recall—rather eee Bg : : 5 i depagy" 
paint which could be of ering | carelessly porhaps—-thatthe Em~ the “Cénfedgration's decision {may cover .both these considera | polltiéal campatim | tesue.: of Mr.) 
public of any 0: | peror was-an curnest, post as far was taken at on-emergency oxe- tons In the following way. — Acheson: aiid his policies. 
‘cutive meeting, called to discuss 


Affairs of the different Domontions. 
in Italy 
of life: Here the “slllance-poten- . y 
pected by public opinion to make 
purpose.” * - H ¢ ; overn 
: a: nation-wide general strike} oie ig walting to sec” the. ou 
Hbeiady ‘ ! ,, in his State. 
which had the: responsibility for poetry anything new ns far as the the date and duration of the placed ‘observers here is.that the | ' : 
Dominions. ' : He should sound out-the-Brie'. *--- oP ee 
back as 19¢1.. It wag,in.fact, in he “sow suppression of disorder ‘ . President Truman last night 


There have so far been four of| throughout Japan have’ ab-| a common purpose for individyal 
SE ae eee en nee Rome, March 21, | Per ove towards a settlement with 
ner to protest against new Govern | come of, the political’ situation: in Mr. wh 
initlating uction. At Biewin d)s-| Emperor is concerned,.There ure t strike. Egyptian Ambnessador’s instruc-/| . Tq ‘pte is thought to herald» «: 
tish Government, ° on.“ possible mmedo tt tlear that. he fs sticking 


at | Cent | ee . September of that year when the : 

12a -Free discussion Imperial Sattar : Dresented the menwures oe over the wack renee pol ac mew penis : mada Jt cteralary of State. and: =: 

& : mpecror with: the ns. of Pearl en y the ristian: Democrat | tions, thus satisfying | 7 TUB. : ue 
rh i "a \Minister of the Interior, Mr. | public expectation of a gesture of; approves his conduct ‘nd polleles. '- 


reconciliation. ; 


U “ , 
F A brief summary of the pro-| Harbour, that. Hiratito gaye one 
G-SWIRE— | -ceociings - ofthe .coaference._ has j his t 7 
i 7 now been published. ‘The im- 


2 


: ; : i Be ait sioney ‘ wetdea 

oa National. 5 donial.from.Key...West,... Flori 
Two National cspirations | npreihg Is on holiday, of reports 

But that he should put for- he intends replacing (Mr. 
ward a8 precondition of any ‘ 
formal renowal ‘of ‘dlacuasiqns 
terms which Britain. would bo 
unilkely to accépt outright... — 


m ous recitatlo! {11] Mario Seclba, opponent of the 
5 nous recitations: : | he _ Atalinn Lett, -—___. ice 


, Pa ta The. measures Inclyded the fe- 
. There aro all brotherly seas; Imposition of a law requiring 
ea ere Peat he 

‘ so? ’ s, tlic 
Distant oe granting .of powers to local Pre- 


- out: ing fects to ban political demonstra- 
tort the anlar ne Counc, tiotia for np ree montis 
H he “democratic” 7 : Fs n e-stre! n o! he . (3g pe 
boron Beal, ant einai ei any proposals : country's police force to its April, | For instance,, if eae recog- 
ed the Pearl Harbour.,, dawn -at- j tlonal unity tt th pees Suecnac Election) level of esti Rerpye. to pata 
5 aed Yet reading this . i i spiri f a’ "i nc ate cacti ” 7 
tack plans. : i - : Nile’ Valley. “(Egypt and the! “abparen}ty, he hoa become 59 
Today, detnonstrating’ —stee) | Sudan) and the withdrawal . of} powerful; as tho {dol of left wing, 
workers ‘clasied with police at| British troops were ‘stipulated (28) ‘appéase-Russin \, agitators that‘; 
Colle-ferro; North of here, these preconditions; It ie unilkely} pPreadent, ‘Truman «. is’ fearful," 
eae bectanle ie yaad ahi iii ie fire. Acheson, that he’ 
would follow, since'London wo . ) po} = 
probably wish to Know. in ‘much ine eae ot, ae ae 
greater detail just what" they ‘cofal | 
«| would Involve, — + =" ‘ 


‘ 


Mx Wherry said, “Deon Aches ‘/ . 
s0n {s.the most powerful man in- 
tho Government today. The yolce 
fy the volco of President: Truman i 
but the hand is.the hand-of Denn’ ’ 
Acheson oie : 


a 


‘Mobiloil 


_ Severs] union leaders were 
Were arresfed.—Reutcr. . 


servers. CON Gihes Republicans, meme! 


e , . . * . 
:* -. SERETSE ASE: : bers of the House of Fesentne. 
i ed : aa mestie! ne, at tae, Meee Ge 
_, All confessed and. thelk Yeader. .., Jaondon, March 21 | FOnnen ei kept © oat Fee MMe Athen cic. 
. be } pen for ,al ot Callfornia, attacked Mr. Ache-.s , 
Stefan Manov, who was, sents) Mr. Perey Fraenkel, tawyer + | now deal between ‘the two'coun-] ron in the House yeaterday for his. | | 


ii the, crea! Seretse, Khama, the exiled cbiet= | (ries, but time would be gained] role Jn, allowing M. | Valent 
tribe, sald today that a letter has which would allow Egypt to ree Gubltchey, conyleted Russian’ spy, 
been’ sent to the Commonwealth | Whether the. presept Government)-tobe deported to Russia -ond-ao 
Relations Minister suggesting, for | Will remain long énough jn {he imprisonment. 
the second ‘time, that Serctse | zaddle before new" elections to tence! * pale 

jut: should go ‘back as chief for ajcarry through: to, o finish ‘the 
¢ reply: to Bir Fred¢rick| two-year. .probationnry, perlod—- negotlations for iseaty revisionr 
warning: 02) | Reuter. Ga + > Lit Wiese are. underteken-~-Router 


Woe : 
-. Other. scatonces, awarded by 
the Sofla ‘District: Court, zrqnged 
up to.15. years;. The: woman! g 
10 years—Reuter. "yt 


te fee 


SOLES 


Pad 


AIQe 


ah 


C 


WHILE 


ie Tho West -German-C 
any’ war 
in its hands. 


“tt would be a great mistake if the Western. we 
ed into sleep by a false sense of security,” he d 
‘ which gave details ofta recent: Press interview. by 


_ WAR WOULD 


ADENAUER SAYS: 


FOR RUS 


a 


SIAN 


Bonn, ‘March 21. 


hancellor,-Dr.-Konrad ‘Adenauer, - is: convinced - that ~ 
‘would be worth. while for. Sovict. Russia which, placos Europe 


4 


world-allowed itself to be, lull- 


leclared in a statement 
the Chancellor. ‘ 


“‘Amorlcan atmoment has. advanced so far that there is no immediate 


danger of tho United States boing conquered,” he said. 


“DUNKIRK” 
TO BE 
-RE-ENACTED 


. London, March 21: 
The hardy British yachts- 
men and “Sunday sailors” 
who helped to rescue the Bri- 
tish expeditionary force from 
Dunkirk beaches in. 1940 are 
to make the trip again. 


It {is a sentimental journey 
commemorating the great armada 
of Vitle ships which steamed 
from England to the French 
shore 10 yearseugo to ald the 
hardpressed Royal Navy. 
Bombed and strafed, the nmateur | 
_snilors piled from beach to ship 
emburking the exhausted Britlsh 
und Allied troops driven to the 
coast by the Nazi blitzkrieg. 


U 

Mony civillinn would-be rea- 
cuers decd with the soldiers they 
tried to save, Germun fighters 
riddled their tiny vessels with 
machine-gun fire. Some launches 
sonk under the weight of © the 
troops crowded aboard. Bur 
most yot home, : 
+ Tentatlve date! for the com- 
memorative trip ‘is. June 4, 1050, 
It wus act at a meeting of ship 
coptains aboard the Wallington, 
Headquarters ship of the Hon- 
ourable ' Company = of Master 
Mariners, moored in the Thamas 
River. A committee — under 
Captain Willam oH. Coombs, 
barrister and master mariner, way 
appointed to make arrangements,’ 
8ald Captain Caombs: “We 
. want to-recapture the spirit 
and memory of Dunkirk. Wo 
have been in touch with tho 
Mayor-of Dunkirk and are ase. 
» sured of.a great.welcome:there.” 
The plan ts for ao flect of little 
ships—yachts, Myhters, Inunchcs 
—to follow the course to 
Dunkirk taken in 1940. A me 
morlal . service will be held 
elther In Dunkirk orion the 

beaches. 
Fewer risks will be taken this 
time. Warned the Ministry’ of 
Transport: “During the 1040 ova- 
cuation we could have little ree 
of 
the 


scaworthiness 
to 


gard for the 
the ships which went 
rescue. 

“But in 1950 practical scamen 
should make sure that only 


—— suitable-craft-make-the~trip,-Wo- 


enn't count on the calm weather 
we had in 1940." 

The sailors hope that the Ware 
time Premler, Winston Churchill, 
will see them off.—Assoclated 
Press. a : 


U.S. DEFENCE 
_ APPROPRIATION 


Washington, March 21. 
The House Appropriations Com- 
mittee today approved $18,911, 
127,300 for national defence in the 
next fiscal year beginning July 1. 


“The Committee sald that even 
this big sum might be too little 
to prepare the United States for 
an emergency. The need for 
economy and financial stability 
kept {t'from rafsing the . total. 

‘ The Committee admitted grave 
risks ore being taken in not 
financing a better prepared pro-. 
sramme-—Assoclated Press. 


DN; THE Pn. 


& 


‘NEW; AMPROVED:| 
BORN 


“Howaver, I.doubt whethet" 
the Soviet leaders ure 60 Con- 
vinced of the state of American 
armunient that a war would 
not pay for the Sovict Union. 

“It Is my conyiction that any 
war would be worth. while for 
Soviet Russin. which — placed 
Europe In Its hands.” 

Wether, after o Soviet con- 
quest of Europe, the United 
States would fight for Sts‘ tbera- 
tionszeems to me not only qucs- 
tlonable but Improbable,” Dr. 
Adenauer continued, 

“Therefore, 1 believe that the 
temptation for Soviot Russia ‘to 
make war Is greater than Js 
genarally ‘supposed. 

“In these circumstances peace 
can only be assured if the Sovict 
leaders ure convinced of the im- 
possibility, of the conquest of 
: Europe.” 


 Wostorn Europe 


* Turning to the — position In 
h Western Europe, Dr.. Adenauer 
renid, “ft ip not very- promisins, 
Great Britain, in vonkequence of 
the recent Elections, is not In the 
position to take bokd steps, That 
is quite clear In the field of 
foreign policy, The Government 
rand the Opposition have, in con- 
‘trast to the usual Brillsh  tradi- 
{lon, very differcrit views upon 
the defence of. Western Europe. 


“In Italy there are 
‘domestic conflicts. in France 
one strike follows anothor, The 
Councl) of Gurope has so. far 
obtalned no noteworthy suc- 
cess. tw thls stato of affairs ao 
genulno belief In the future of 
Europe |s not strong. 


“Soviet. Russla knows that 
quite’ well, But I am convinced 
that the entlre position could be 
altered. overnight If the world 
could secure an effective proof 
that Europe hag still the strength 
for fresh Ife. 

"If Sovict Russia really cauld 
be convinced of the firm resolve 
of Western Europe to take a new 
and decisive step, then that 
would have a profound influence 
upon Sovict policy jin  Eusope 
‘and throughout the world.” 


~ Union with France 


Turning _to the problem of 
union with France, Dr. Adenauer 
pointed to the disunited state of 
Germany after the Napoleonic 
wars. - : 

“A Customs Unlon and a Cus- 
toms Parliament,” he sald, “were 
the beginning of Europeun unity. 
I om thinking of o similar pro- 
cedure. One should bring the 
two ‘countries together gradually 
on the basis of Customs and cc=" 
nomy,”" rae 

He suggested that 
Economle Parliament could’ be 
established containing lected 
members of the Parlinments of 
the two countries, : : 

The two Governments could. 
found an organisation which 
would be'‘responsible for carry- 
ing out ‘the decisions of the 
Economic Parliament. 

“In the course of time,” he 
continued, "the functions of the 
Economic Parllament- and the 
Economic Government represen- 
tation could be extended so ns to 
bring the two countries ‘together 
step. by step.” , 


Time for action 


“The Soar conventions,” Dr. 
Adenauer continued, “give an 
example of the way in which 
two countries can be merged to- 
gather. - 5 


a4 common 


‘CLEAR VISION. 


roe 


serious | 


“it would undoubtedly be a 
great ctep forward when 
Franchmen and Germans could 
sit sround one table In ore 
House to work together, and 
share the common rasponslbill- 
ty. 

Sreneh demands for security 
could be sntised-ond-the growth 
of’ German natlonalism. could be 
prevented,” ho declared. : 

“A unlon between France anil 
Gormany should, Dr. Adenaucr 
added, be completed by bringlng 
in the Benelux States, Scandl- 
novin and Italy. 

“If Great Britain 
rpards herself as 
Power. she could take a piace 
within the framework ~ of | the 
United Nations of Europe corres~ 
ponding to her position ‘and 
strength,” 

A, strong Europe would be 
respected by Russia but it. would 
not. be strong cnough to consti- 
tute n serious threat to the So- 
viet Union, pa 

“Europe mus 


really re- 
a European 


not shut her 
eyes to the present danger. Blind- 
ness siynifies capitulation —be- 
cause it hampers the power, to 
act, he time for action has 
com Dr, Actenuuer concluded. 
Reuter. out 
a 


INDO-CZECH 


TRADE TALKS 


Progue, March 21. 

Negotintions are opening here 
tomorrow between a five-man 
Indian trade delcyation and the 
Czechoslovak Government for (a 
renewal . of the Indjan-Czech 
trade agreement, 

The agreement is due to expire 
on March 3).. 

The Indlan delegation Is head- 
‘ed by Mr. N, Rughavan, Indian 
Ambassador. . He will be assla- 
ted by Mr, K, R, §. Khimani. 
Commerical Attache here, Mr. 
A, C. N, Nombira, Indian Cou 
salior at Berne, Switzerland, Mr. 
S, Boothallngham, Joint Seere- 
tary of tho Ministry of Industry 
and Supplies in Now Delhi, and 
Mr. M. “A. Masber, Director -- of 
the: Scindia Steamship Naviga- 
tlon Compariy of Bombay, who 
will take part os a non-oflicial 
member.—Rauter, : 


CZECH ALLIANCE 
WITH RUSSIA 


Prague, March 21. 

Vice-Premier Vilem Siroky, in 
his first public statement as 
Czechoslovakia'’s Foreign Minls- 
ter, said here today that the fore- 
most task of Czcechoslovakia’s 
foreign ~polley~ was’ “the ~intensi- 
ficgtion ani fortification of 
Czechoslovakin’s loyal ” alliance 
and fritndship with the Soviet 
Union." 

Mr, Siroky, appointed Foreign 

inister to succeed M, Vladimir 
Clementis, whose resignation was 
announced last week was ad- 
dressing the Foreign Affairs 
Committee’ of the National’ As- 


sombly, : 

He sald that the basis of a suc 
cessful policy of striving for the 
maintenance of peace and the 
securing of the country's inde- 
pendence,-{s further and bolder 
progress on the road of building 
up Soctallam jn Czechoslovakia, 
Reuter, - : , 


4 THE CHINA’ MAIL, 


‘THURSDAY, MARCH 23, "1080. “7 


Manila, March 22. 
_. The. biggest counterfeitin 
case in Philippine history too! 
on an international arfgle toi 
day following ao stout denidl 
by the Chinese Embassy of a 
statement by the counter. 


| feiters’ leader that the bogus 


Tho French Antarctic. exneditlon which left Brest, France, 


aboard the “Commandant 
In mid-January when It arrived 
Land. 


Charcot,” reached 


¢ Its. destination 
at, Cape Discovery In Adelle 


Eleven members of the crew will stay three more than 


a'year to make sclentific obzervations, Photo shows the “Com- 


mandant Charcot’ moored to an ice floe 
Diccovery.—(Assoclated Preos Phato). 


when nearing Capo 


Jerusalem attack 


on trusteeship — 
» os , _ | Goneva, March’ 21. - 
The toxt of 2 telogram from the Jowish Mayor. of 


Jerusalem, Mr. Danicl Auster, 
the entire population of. the | 
agreo to trustccship was publishod | 


The telegram, which was ad- : 


dressed to M. Roger Garreau, 
President of the Trusteeship 
Council, which jis at present 
debating the statute for Jeru- 
salem, declared: 

"On behalf of the entire popu- 
‘lation of Jerusalem, I 
oppose any plan td Internationnlise 
Jerusalem, Three thousand’ ycars 
ago, Jerusalem was a sovereign 
Stntc having glven to the world 
the highest moral ahd . cultural 
values of the Bible, ete. 

“We will never agree’ to 
trusteeship. We are an Integral 
part ‘of Isracl snd’ its. eternal 
capital.” # : 
. Mr. Aubrey Eban, the Israel 
observer to the ‘ Trustecship 
Council, said: today ‘that the bitter 
animosity felt by all Jews ° to-~ 
wards Germans and ‘Germany 
would not perfhlt the return to 
Isracl of even German religious 
bodies or institutions: : 

Mr. Eban spoke during today’s 
debate on articles. dealing with 
the protection and réturn of re- 
Nglous property in Jerusalem. 

Tho Israel] Govarnmont, sald 
Mr. Eban, could not at présent 
permit the return to German 
churches or religlous Institu- 
tlons of ‘property. previously 
—held- by them: tn-Jerusatemrand 
which {s at’ present held’ by the 

Jeracti Custodian.¢ 

Mr. Eban sald he supports a 
proposal by France and - the 
United States which lays down 
that such property shall clther- 
bo restored or transferred to“ an- 
other church, or mission or other 
religious or charitable agency, 
representative of the same con- 
fession,  —~ ; 

This would permit that | the 
ownership of the property held 
before the lnst war by, for exam-< 
ple, the German ‘Luthtran 
Church, could be legally remimed 
by the Swedish Latheran Chtirch. 

Mr. Eban’ cited’ several - ¢ofn- | 
mercial concerns formesly owned 


strongly. . 


-p-r- firmed. reports. sald, th’ 


tating ' that 
‘will nover 
hero today. 


H-bomb test 
e “\"eme 
in Pacific 
rumoured 
* Washington, March 21, 
Atomle Enorgy Commisalon . 

officiate today refused to con: 
firm Presa ‘reports that -the 
hydrogen bomb will be tested 
at Eniwetok Atoll in April. 

- The officlal’ sald: “We do 
not deny! we do not comment.” . 

. This ts the usual answer given 

; by the Commission to “any 

: question, beaping on future - 
operations, ) 7 ve 
[The Commission has an-. 
nounced: that another atomic 
test Will bo made, ‘but even-the 
date has never been disclostd. 
However, sources with cloge 
contacts. at.the Commission 
doubt the accuracy of the re- 
port of \a- Press association 
(not the United press) btcause 
the. dévelopment of’ the first 
hydrogen bomb le expected 
to take longer than the petlod 

: between! Prealdent Truman's. 
announced -declalon to make It 
and Aprtl,-when the uncon- 

0 bomb 

would be 


tested, — 
Press. |, ; 


‘ 


dollar notes manufactured 
were intended for payment of 
‘Chiang Kal-shek’s troops. * 


: The statement, made by Antl-. 
pez * Pinedo, “40-year-old gelf- 
confessed organiser ‘of the coun. 
terfelting — gang, was ‘termed 
utterly fantastic by a npokesman 
for the Chinese Embassy, 


- Pinedo claimed his operations 
started with a deal with Natlon~ 
alist argent; who wanted to buy 
$300,000:- for -- the -- Nationalist 
trovps.-* A oO 


' The Embassy spokesman sald 
there: was no truth whatsoever 
to -this part, of Pinedn's confes~ 
sion. ; 


A police captain discourntea 
Pineda’s claim of an alleged cons" 
tract with Nationalist agents. 
The. police have not entireiy 
dropped, however, thé theors 
that bogus dollar notes may have 
been produced at’ Teast In part 
for export abroad." >"! ; 


An unconfirmed rumour sald o 
local’' bankor had: purchnsed 
$200,000 worth of b 
$50 bills with the, intention of 
amuggling them to dollar-hungry 
South East Asian,.countries, Ins 
eluding Indonesla, 


Pineda and his companions 
were allowed provisional Jiberly 
after‘each had posted $5,000 ball. 


The police are looking deeper 
info suspected connections bee 
‘tween the counterfelters and an 
American dentist, Edward Jen- 
sen, oged 32, formerly of: Ogden, 
Utah, whose arrest Inst week led 
to raids on forgers’ hideouts anit 
the selzure of: more than -$4;000 
worth of bogus $60-notes un 
printing paraphernalia last night. 

Jensen, who was__ allegedly 
found with forged $50 bills tn 
his possession, was charged with 
counterfeiting, ilegal-. possession 
of flroarms and theft of other 
firearms, There are indications 
that Jensen had acquired the 
forged notes from the Pineda 
gang. Pineda jis reported to have 
received two cheques on Ame- 
rican banks which were found to 
be non-existent. © The cheques 
were presumably paid to Pineda 
dn‘.-exchange —_ for counterfeit 
notes—United Pers. — 


‘Marsellles, March 21, 


Dock workers. clashed with 


4police’ here today shortly after 


taking a vote to go on. with thelr 


‘} strike © agalnst the war In Vict~ 


nam. Several of the dockers were 
; arrested.—Reuter, 


United | 


Woeessovesesooorooores | 


AIR: COLLISION 

é “" Poulon,' March 21, 
- Two military © training’ planes 
collided ‘In mifd-alr near here tos 
day, killing: the ‘two pilots. .. i 

One plane-had its tall torn off 
before crashing'in.a back garden, 
The other exploded in the air.— 
Reuter, 7 : 


. ok seek, ac. 
by! Germaiy® religious institutions 
to -Llustrate the camplexity of th 
problem Reuter af ate 

een Ge + 


BIGGER & BETTER THAN EVER! ' 


——. 


NS 


UEC 


a 


Naaney od 


V 


_ For. Sportshirts- OF ‘Distinction 


“MACDONALD 


0, 


NELSON-BAGE ; 


_NYLON-AGETATE SHIRT. 


"SEE QUR NEW. STOCKS: ' 


sg/THE SINCERE CO., LTD. 


When you want spmething to 

back up your trainihg, to give -. 
you extra staminas‘thoose 
BOVRIL. cvery time. *, Bovril..‘-€ 
puts beef into you,_it fortifies: 
you for a strenuous game. A 

‘cup of ‘hot Bovril before the 
match: will help io keep you 
going at.full-speed—and it’s a 
good: move,to.make BOVRIL . 
afull-timehabit - .. | : 


 BOVRIL_ 


+ 


: gives strength'to 


win 


GHREROD foo! 


ms eeres . ne spp ayy bd ILA MAH 
sacncono dhdnt li a Ss Sama lsses 
o 4 ry . ‘i 
: 


a an. 


oF 


HARD Se ah eae 
"BOR a ee 


FRE KE A tts 
OF ont oo om a ae 


Tn Kee oe ABRDAK OF RAR U4, 


FAR EAST/EUROPE LUXURIOUS DC-6 SERVICE 


Fly over the weather — in pressurized cabins 
‘Mongkong/Banykok y PAA of CPA 
- Bungkok Europe by SAS-DC'C_ 
a March 31st : 
_ Weokly Flights from April 14th. 
etre Via Bangkok, Calcutta, Karachl & Lydda - . 
CONNECTING 8AS-—SEAVICES TO 18 EUROPEAN COUNTRIES 
y TO NEW YORK VIA GLASGOW 
TO. BUENOS AIRES VIA RECIFE, RIO DE JANEIRO - 
4 MONTEVIDEO : ; ‘ 


SCAWDINAVIAN 


AIRLINES SYSTEM 
General Agents -for Nongkong, Macau and South China: 
THORESEN & CG., LTD 


Queen's Dullding, Top Floor Tal, 


(No, to lee House Street) Telegrama; Sasyaterms 


31241-263 
APB9 


. To 
— Indo China 
| &£urope 
FLIGHTS TO—- 
PARIS — 
EVERY 
__ MONDAY & SATURDAY 


— AIRFRANCE 2 


“QUEERS BLOG.) GROUND, FLOOR (OP. STAR FERRY) S ih 2°. IELO SORBN Hg: 


GET THERE SOONER! 7 
STAY THERE LONGER! 


Plan cow to visit thls year's- 
Beitiah todusteies Pair io 


London and Birningham, May - 


819, , Vou will see the world's 
gecateat disptay of Daitlh proe 
ducts &ud be Iq persona) touch 
With influential buyers from 


ovet 100 countries, , 


jefore deciding you cap’y apare ‘ 


3 the. time away, (rom yotr 
business, consider bow Speed+ 
bird service telescopes treeks of | 

je traveling -thne int 


“RO, 
“} decisio: 


Wihilatk HICSE 


12, Des'Vodux Road, Central, 
: +, Mexzaning Floor, us 
HONG KONG, 


Telephones: 
Editor In Chief.”. 


- Bubsoription Rates a 
3 months ... HK8$16.00' 
HK826.00 
HK872.00 | 


All news contributions to be 
addressed to Kditorein«Chtef, 


Advertisements and 
communications whould be ‘ad- 
dressed’ to the ‘Company: CHINA 

MAIL LTD.. . 


——— 


aver 


a 
~ MARRIAGE *. 
EB 
‘>> March 1, at’ Yatton-- Parish 
Church by the Very Rev, the 
Dean of Bristol and the Rev. 
Prebendary G. A. Beechey, 
Lieut. James Henry Fuller 
Eberle, R.N., son of Mr. and 
Mrs..V. Fuller Eberle, of 
Cloverham, nr. Bristol, to Ann 
Patricia, daughter of Mr, and 
Mrs, Edgar Thompson, of 
Horigkong., 


A’ CRUEL 
DISAPPOINTMENT 


The cancellation of the trip 
of the "Genaral .Gordon" to 
Shanghai has been a cruel 
blow to many People: Most 
of those “booked to go from 
here ‘were'women and chil- 
dren prepared and anxious to 
face whatever the future 
held for them beside.., their 
menfolk. -The far larger 
number . booked to leave 
Shanghai had disposed of all 
their belongings for what has 
been called a pittance.’ ;The 
breakdown of the arrange- 


ments thus bears a callous} 


complexion which ‘makes it 
all’ the more deplorable. 

The ostensible reason for 
the breakdown was the re- 
fusal of the. Communist au- 
thorities to allow the two 
shallow-draft “landing craft 
to go up river by the’ unmined 
channel. This refusal -in 
turn has been attributed, to 
some doubt. in; the minds of: 
the local ‘Shanghai authori- 
ties as to the precise status of 
these ships. They belong to 
the American Navy but were 
actually chartered to the. 
American President Line and 
manned: by merchant sailors} 
That surely was explained to 
them. But one is entitled to 
assume -that the reason. ran 
deeper than this, 

The last time this liner 
went up to Shanghai ona 
_Similar_mission she_went_right 
up river. That was) before 
the reported mining of the 
normal channel, Naturally 


| the Communists resent this 


mining, Qne.. wonders why 
they hayén't done something: 
about 4#they ought to be 
able, tozsweep this channel, 
and * “it swept. “But in 
. jhave seen fit to 

and the Ameri- 

y; for the entire 

nd'bo: 


theys ly are not, and 
nobod}""kifows that better 


“them- 


But. if° the Communists 
. tesented all along any. -at- 
tempt. to sidetrack and cir- 
cumvent the -issue of. the 
blockade, they ought to have 
made that clear from the first 
and refused visas accordingly. 


ways haye ‘been arranged, at 
‘least for the’ diplomatic per 
sonnel. “Tientsin, for.:exam- 
ple, is. a,safe’ and busy ‘port. 
‘Trains.have made direct:runs 


Lbetween: Shanghai’ and‘ Can- 


“ton, ‘and.cne went. throug 
even to! Kowloon, 6b: 
. There dppears to have been 
a sudden change of decision, 
Uf. that’ was purely local, it 
may, yet’ be over-ridden. 
‘number of motives’ have beeh. 
put forward which might well 


influence’ the,Tocal authoritits 


in Shanghal.:On not hith 

mentioned was, the’ fact that 
yesterday,morning ;there was 
‘g'Nationolist alr raid onthe’ 


ERLE» THOMPSON. — On 


MA a much greater rate both i : 
(“ind material. 


After -the failure of General 
Waves June ‘| offensive 
CUBattleare") he had been 
replaced as C-in C Middle East 
by General .Auchinieck.. The 
. mew Commander-in-Chicf de» 
manded “time. for; tratning. the 
forces at his disposal ard 
thought that a German attack 
through Turkey, . Syria and 
+ Palestine might make the do- 
sert. no -longer the dectslue 
front. iD <a 
Mr, Churchill ‘felt “shi 
disappointment” at the “serl. 
ous divergences. of -victwws and 
> values between ux” and states 
that “the Goneral’s early de- 
eistons were also perplexing.”) 


I wos sensitive to the hostile 
propaganda which . asserted thut 
t was the British policy to fight 
wit any other troops but our 
own and thus avold the shedding 
of Unfted Kingdom blood, __Bri- 
tish casualtics in the Middle Enat, 


.[including Greece ‘and Crete, had 


In fact been grenter than those of 
all our other forces put together, 
but the nomenclature which was 
customary ‘gavé''a ‘false Impres- 
sion.of the facts.” .- ‘ 
. The Indinn divisions, of which 
one-third of the infantry ond the 
whole of the artillery were Bri- 
tish, were ,not.. described as 
British-Indlan divisions. The 
armoured divisions, which had 
borne the brunt of the fighting, 
were entirely British, but this did 
not appear in: their: games, The 
fact that “ British,” troops were 
rarcly mentioned in any reports 
of the fighting gave colour to the 
enemy's taunts, and provoked 
unfavourable comment not only 
in. the United States but in 
Australla, - tage : 
+I had. looked, . forward to the 
arrival of the 50th Division: as an 
effective means of countering 
these disparaging ‘currents, Gen- 
eral Auchinleck’s decision to pick 
this os the division to send to 
Cyprus: certainly seemed unfor- 
tunate, and lent substance to the 
reproaches to which we were un- 
fustly subjected. The Chiefs of 
Gta at homer were equally 
astonished on military grounds 
that so strange a use should be 
made of this magnificent body of 
men, Indeed, {t could not bo 
reconciled with “any strategic 
conception comprehensible, to our 
thought, "we, 
mn AS Ned pt ad 
Serious résolve\: . 
A’ ‘far more serious resolve by 
General Auchinleck was to delay 
all action against Rommell in the 
Western Desert, at frst for three 
and cventually for,,.more than 
four and a half months, 
vindication of Wavell's action of 
June 15, “ Battleaxe," is found 
In the fact that although we were 
somewhat worsted and withdrew 
to our original position the Ger- 
mans were utterly unable to. ad- 
vance for the whole” !s pro- 
longed perfod. * : 
Their communications, threat- 
ened by Tobruk, were insulficient 
to bring” them ‘the. acécssary” re- 
inforcements of.armoyr or cver. 
of artillery* ammunition to enable 
Roraniel to do, more-than hold on 
by his willl-power’ and prestige. 
The feeding of his force imposed 
so heavy a straip upon him tha’ 
ite. size could only, grow gradually, 
In. these circumstances he 
thould have been engaged con- 
‘Unuously iby the British Army, 
which had ample road, rall, and 
sca communications, and war 


can generally be remedied. It 
is to be hoped, for, the sake of 
the victims themselves, that 
this will prove to-be the case. 
But if in fact the decision to 
block the arrangeiments came 


from the'Governinent-in Pek-! po. 


ing, the outléokiis a gloomy 
one. The réport* that the 
Consular.Body, at its meeting 
in Shanghai yesterday, de- 
clded to address.. its. repre- 
sentations not.to.the local au- 


cordi thorities but to Peking, is not]: 
’ Alternative: routes ‘could al- | rea: : 


ring. «. mee 
The: political . climate - in 
general has { 
lately. ‘The reaction both: in 
Moscow and in Peking to'Mr. 
Degn_ Acheson's : two: policy 


waterfront—a very. bad: bit. of { 


-tiniing iinless it was 


rcaaly. 
‘doatimed to make’ trouble. Bu 


But | 
im. 


ia ponent 


Tha |. 


t: improved | + 


Crisis 


being continually “strengthened at 


i aye ae . mY ee ! 
Crisis in Russia . 

Generals .are often proric, it 
they have the chance, tolchooto a 
set-piece battle, when all-is ready, 
at thelr ‘own salected moment, 
rather than’ to wear down. thé 


enemy by centinded us 


ectacular 
fighting. .They natural 


prefer 


certainty to hazird. They forget}: 


that. war never stops, but burns 
on from day to day with ever- 


changing results not only in onal‘ 


theatre byt In, all, ,At this timo 
the Russian armics were in the 
crisls of thelr agony. 

A third misconception scemed 
to me,.to be 9 disproportionate 


concern for our. Northern. flank, |. 
This ‘indeed required the ;utmosh| - 


vigilance and justified many des 
(ensive preparations and the cone 
struction of strong fortified lincs: 
in Palestine and Syria. The 
situation in this quarter however 
soun became vastly better than 
In June. Syria was conquered. 
The fraq rebellion had been sup- 
oreased. All the key points in the 
desert were held.by our troops. 
.. Above allt, the struggle botween 
Germany and Russia gave new 
confidence to Turkey. While thitl 
hung in thy balance there was no 
chance In the German demand 
for the , passage . of her - armlen 
through Turkish territory. Perala 


was soon to be brought Into -thi'| - 


Allled camp by British and Rus- 

sian actlor. This would carry w. 

beyond the winter. In the mean. 

while the general situation fav- 

oured decisive.action in the West- 

ern Desert... . ‘ 
a s e * 


On July 19 the Chiefs of Stait| : 


telegraphed to General Auchin- 
eck: 

You said that an offensive in 
she Wester Desert could not be 
contemplated until you had 
‘earnt two and preferably 
properly trained ormoured di- 
vistons. Until Germany attacked 
Russia it was imposaible for us 
to tontemplate sending. any con 
siderable reinforcement of crul- 
ser tanks from here, since wo 
had. to regard = invasion in 
August or September asa’ dis- 
tinct probabllity, We cannot 
yay this probability has now dis. 
appeared altogether, since Rus- 
sin might crack quite soon,. but 
we are prepared to take a chance 
{{ by doing so we can regain 
Cyrenaica, with all: the benefits 
that this implics..,. Ga. ca 
In. your. telegram of July — 1§ 
you expressed ‘a’ doubt * whothe 
you chn malntdii: Tobruk’. ‘atted 
‘September.’ ’ We‘ therefore: *"ass 
sume that any offensive to regain 
Cyrenaica cannot be. . postponed 
beyond that month. In our esti- 
mation there is bvery .chance of 
our relative pir strengths im- 
proving up to September, anid 
possibly, even continuing to im- 
prove after’ ttfat date, but this 
of course depends upon the out- 
come of the present - Russian 
campaign. ag tt gfe 2 : 

Having regard {othe .above 
considerations, it looks from hero 
that ‘the best, if not the only, 
chance of ‘retaking ‘Cyrenatca’ 1s 
to launch an offensive by ‘the 
‘end-of- September “atthe latest, 
Would you. feel like doing that it 
we were to send you an odditi« 
{onal 150 cruiser tanks ot once? 
Wo reckon they could reach Suez 
by September 13-20. 

In full accord 1 also 
graphed personally: 
Prime ‘Minister 

Auchinieck.: 


three 


tele. 


to General 
19 July 41, 

«..+ The Defence Committee 
were concerned to: sce the 80th 
Division, your one complete, 
fresh Britfsh division, locked up 
In Cyprus, in what appeared ‘to 
be a purely defensive role, and 
wender whether other _ troops. 
might not have been found, 

rhey did not sce how. a Ger- 
men offensive - could dovelop 
upon Syria. »Palestine, and Ira 
from the North before the end: of 
September. at tho carliest.”. The 
ferice Committee felt. that 
Persia was-in for greater danger 
of German «infiltration and ins 
trigue,..and-that strong action 
may have.to~ be taken’. there, 
This however, {s, in - General 
Wavell’s' sphere, ‘and his: evident 
wish to-act Is. receiving ‘urgent 
and carnest-attention’‘here;-" |. - 
Te we do not use the lull.accor- 
ded us. by: the Gormon .entanglo- 
ment In Russla to restore the sit. 
uation in. Cyrenalca -the’ oppor- 
unity «may. never recur. A 

;passed ““aince™: the 

failure - at Sollunt. ‘and ima 
ably ‘another month. moy: have to 
pass before. a renewed effort: {x 
possible. ° ‘This’: ‘interval .”: should 
(coatainly give plenty. of {me ‘for 
training.” It ‘would...seom: just: 
Nablo to fight’a hard and decisive 
battld-in the Western:‘Desert 
fore’ the sityation changes to our 
detriment,’ and: to. ‘run: ’ 
major, risks .’ 
tory-has, rately: 


ub} 


“CO! 


in the 


-By- Winston 
“Churchill 


repeat that to launch an offen- 
sive ‘with the inadequate means 
at present at. our disposal fs 
not in my opinion; a justif- 
able: operntidn of , War, and: fs 
almost .certain to’ result in’ a 
further lengthy postponement 
. of the date: on which wo can 
assume offensive with. reason-. 
able chances of success. To 
gain results risks must be run 
and I am ready to run them, it 
they are reasonably justifiable. 
Finally: ‘ : 
My — immediate intentions 
- Are. Flrst,- to-- consolidate: our 
positfons {n Cyprus and Syria 
as srapidly as possible, and ‘ta 
maintain our position in latter, 
Secondly, to press. on with the 
sadly-needed regrouping, re- 
organisation, and re-equipment 
of divisions. and — bridgades, 
which have not only suffered 
casualties and losses ‘of sy \p~ 
ment In Greece, Crete, Libya, 
Eritrea, and Syria, but have 
-had to be [used] in most in- 
stances not os formations but 
lecemeal, Thirdly,. with the 
ntendant-General, to expedite 
the reorganisation and modcr- 
nisation of the rearward ser- 
vices af supply, movement, and 
repaira. Fourthly,’ to safe- 
guard the training and equip- 
ment of our armoured forma- 
tions, without which no offen- 
lve js possible. Fifthly, to 
reconnoltre mand plan inten- 
sively for an‘ offensive in Libya 
ns foreshadowed in telegram of 
July 19 from Commanders-in- 
Chief to Chiefs of Staff. ' As a 
result,. of this planning:. 1 
shall, I.am_ sure, be _ asking 
you In near future for further 
means anecessary. to. success. 


T could not help feeling at this 
thne oo. stiffness in General 
Auchinieck's ‘attitude, .. which 
would not be helpful to’ the in- 
terests wo all served. . Books 
written since the war have shown 
how subordinate but influential 
portions of the Cairo Opcrations 
Stoff had deplored the decision to 
send the Army to Greece. : They 
did not know how fully and will- 
ingly General Wavell had accep- 
ted this policy, still less: - how 
searchingly the War Cabinet and 
Chief of Staff: had’ put the issue 
to him, almost inviting -a nega 
tive. Wavell, it was suggested, 
had: been led astray by the polltls 
Clans, andthe. whole: “chain of 
rs. had). followed >on his 
lahce: with “their. .wishes. 
Now, .as a reward ‘for his. good 
nature, he had been removed 
after all his victories .in . the 
moment of defeat. oo 

T-cannot doubt that in these 
circles of .the Staf® there was o 
strong feellng that, the new, Com~ 
mander should not let himself be 
ressed into hazardous adven- 


M. East 


” puicceased which -had ‘crowned { 


eats 


a 


t, 
but_none..the.less_.thoy— docmed 
him in great. peril: They strictly 
forbade ‘him to run any further 
risks until“he could. be. strongly |: 
preslgs: ke might Bra it cut, in 

restigo, he. mm out, in 
fhe precarious position. in. which 
he stood, until’ they. could .bring 
aim thea utmost’ ald in their 
power, - f 
His Une of. communications 
trailed back a thousand: miles to 
Tripoli. Benghazi was o valu-’ 
able short cut for a part at an 
rate of his “suppies and fresh]. 
troops, but! a -toll of. increasing 


eoverity. had to be pald on the|" 


sea transport to both these bases. 
The British ‘forces,’ already 
largely stiporior . in .numbers, 
wero growing daily, The Gor- 
man tank superiority existe: 
iy In quality and organisation. 
y were weaker in the alr. 
They were very short of artillery 
ammunition, and .fcared greatly 
to have to fire it’off. . 5 
Tobruk seemed .a dendly threat 


any ‘moment a sortio might‘ be 
made, cutting his communica+ 
tlons. cy could not tell what 
offensive plans we had, cither by 
sallying m Tobruk: or by the 
advance of our maln body. 
over, while. we remained motlon- 
less they could, be 
wvery. day that passed. ‘ : 
. Mr. Menzies, ‘the. Australian 
‘rime ‘Minister, left'us in May, 
1941, His prolonged visit to Eng- 
‘and -had beon most valuable. H 

had «sat. through two critical 
months with the .War Cabinet, 
and had shared “meny of ou: 
most dificult decisions, He hac 
Not been satlefled. either, with th: 
organisation of the Cabinet o 


with my. exercise of such wide]; 


powers in the conduct of the war | 
He ralsed both points with me 
on several: occasions, and 1: gave/| 
By. reasons for not agreeing with |. 

Im.’ : 

He’ desired the formation of 
an ‘Imperial War ‘Cabinct ‘con- 
taining’ representatives of cach 
of: o.: “four, self - governing 
Dominions, On his homeward 
lourhey ‘through’ Canddo ° Mr, 
Tenzics ‘formally ‘submitted’ his; 
proposals in writing to: Mr. Mace 
enzie King;: General. Smuts, 
und Mr, (Fraser. None of them 
was .however. in favour of the 
change, and Mr, Mackenzie’ King 
in particular deployed ‘formidable 
constitutional arguments joyains} 
Canndao's being committed by ‘her 
representative to tho decisionsé 
of.a councll,in London, 
Soon, however,’ important 
changes took, placo’'in the: Aus- 
tral: . Government. . As. wayt. 
‘Matural, there: were ‘on’ the mor- 
row *-of'. ‘so. many’ ‘nilsfortunes 


that aad notvlve “up to It. 


--It.-goems. that’ up! 
they lke LSD but not’ LST. 


aay 


, 


in Rommel's rear, from which at |. 


owe= |: 
thankful for 


v7 


+ ts 


"Mies, Arnerica” seeks divorce 


Well, you can’t; got astitte-Liko : 


-e oe yeh 


ty ti 
a * oy: 


Now they're said’. «be golng 
to explode. a hydrog 
Eniwetok Island. wl 


_bomb at 
oe 5 


. That place seoms to muto havo 


too caune for bringing \a strong 
complaint before 
Natlons. | * er tha 


the \ United 
eet ree Pee 

1 bet ‘Adam cursed. 

A bit at fursed, f 

When. the Garden of Eden 

Needed weeden) 00 et 


tre 


. @ re 

petrol ration.’ to: br 

doubled” ee 
People with’ cigarette . Ughtera 

aan -now broatho. freely. again. 

* a e 


~ Bloke in Chicag? found a man 
jisder the bed 
11449,” 


“an August. 27, 
and {fs now, aulng, for 
divorce. Meee a if 

At the time he thouxht\the man 
was‘one of the advance guard ‘of 


she Pilgrim Fathers, but later.ho  ” 
wecame., suspicious. ye f 


ot a oo. i 
“Gold :minere tear, up ynain 

street as.clerk finds’ nugget.” °. 
The street was not: payed with 
gold; on the contrary,’ Ini fact. * 
o ak os aa 
Ventrifoquiem? . ..' *, ae 
No. Myrtle. this. McCarthy, who's 
making all the sp?, fuss ist’t® the 
famous dummy, And I'm sure: he 


Sdeesa't take his. ordére.. from 
Moscow. At least, I’m fairly BUD. 


enraged Oey 
“Dr, Barrett says theso lawyera 
are thin, 90 thdt, it Is posgible 'to- 


soo vertically through’ them: ahd . 


that, makes them invisible : froma 
the ground, except’ at’ sunrise or 
sunset on ‘clear days.” "26 ' 7." 


‘Just ng long os.wo. get bpod 


start... 

. " @ eo. 
Financial: equiltbelum. . 

Strangely cnough, P 
worker depends, on ; tipping . 
balance his budget. . é 
- My wife - gets all my’ ‘wages 
said a defendant, - vo bee 


Tho femlalne touch, 7) 0" 
fg Ms Co ee eee 


differences ‘of opinion’ ‘in the]. eae 


Commdnwealth Cabinct nbout the 
conduct of ¢he war. The Labour 
party in Australia o 

approving Mr. Me y 
London. -In view! of thesa politica 
manifestations both: within an? 


ures, but should take his’ tkne |}, 


ang work: on, certainties... Buch a 
mood might well’ have ben ime 
parted to General Auchinleck. 
It was already clear that not 
much progress. would be. made 
by correspondence, : eye 
“Prime —- Minister 
Auchinleck i 
All your telograms to-us and 
ours to you" show | that. .wa 
should “have 0 tai, Epiets ot 

- Stal eatly desire < - 
‘loss Rite immediate’ military 


-to-- 


.sluation prevents you leaving, | 


hope you’ will .coma’ at’ once, 
bringlng with you one or two 
Staff oMcers. In your absence, 
which should be Rept secrets 
. Blamey. [the .Australlan com: 
mander) will act for you, 
Auchinieck ‘was willing | to 
come. His bricf vet ee aren 
was from many points “of view 
helpful: *He-, placed, himself «in 
harmonious relations, with mem=- 
bers of the War Cabinet, with 
the Chiefs of’Stalf, and with the 
War Office... He. spent_a Jong 
week-end. with me at Chequers. 
As we got: to know better this 
distinguished officer, upon whose 
qualitles ‘our fortunes were. now 


Nutishal: Cabinet. On August (251, 
the Australian Labour party re- 
jected this proposal and. de-| 
mnanded .. the resignation of the. 
-Governméni i . 
Menzies resigned, ..and_ was ‘suc=}, 
seeded by'his doputy, Mr. Fadden, 
‘(To be.continued). ‘ 
World C ht ‘reserved. Re- 
production, even partially, in 
Ae ey strictly pro. 
Exclusive ‘rights in| Hong Kong 
. by the “Ching Mati’ 7 


so largely to Gepend, and es he}. 


became acquainted with the high 
circle of the British war machine 
and, saw how easily and smoothly 
it worked, mutual fid 


not nde to ty 

ho wee, . 

resolve to have a prolonged delay 
In’ order to prepare ‘a: sct-picco 
oie to be called Cruad 
swag to be: ; 
would be the | largest’; 0 ; 
we had yet. launched, *. cere 


with’ all the detailed 


arene 


mF. 


tainly shook’ my military advisers. 


pposed a votat 


On -the..28th Mr. }.. 


“Now, here, Is-Dr. cole 


to 


hanghel: 


‘ 


or 


——_-pramme=-whieh 


1 


& 


es lh 


Hoag Kong! 


textiles 


—vaised-in: 
Commons . 


' London, March 21, 
, Me. Harold Wison, President 
of the Board of Trade, told 
Parllamant today that any 
suggestion that protective 
dutles or quotas should be 
Impoued against the British 
colonics would have far- 
reaching Implications Indeed. 
He wae replying to Mr. ~ 
Btanicy Prescott, Conscrvative 
Member for the Darwen 
Division of Lancashire, who 
had asked what the Govern- 
ment’s future pollcy was to- 
wards Imports of finished 
toxtiled goods from Hong 
Kong. a 
Mr. Wilson aald that the 
Imports totatled ‘£137,000 
from Auguat, 1949, to January, 
1960,—Reuter. 


MONEY © 
- BILL IN 
CONGRESS 


. Washington, March 21, 
__ A $20,045,030,164 appropria- 
tion bill, covering the major 
expenses of running the Unit- 
cd States. Government next 
year, went to Congressmen to- 
day.. 


As upproved by the House Ap- 
proprintions Conimittee, the mra- 
Bure carries about $1.500,000,000; 
Jers. than President Worry Tru- 
man asked in hix budget message 
for the next fiscal year which 
begins July 1. But Republicans 
ray they are going to knock ot 
another billion dollars or more 
when the bill comes before the 
House for consideration next 
week, e ; 


Thebs strategy will be to move [ 
ito send it back to the Committee 
with instructions to cut out non- 
vexsential expenditures. - 


The Dit is the first one-puckare 
‘approach = to. the © appropriation 
“problem in modern - history, Tt, 
teortains’ funds for almost Aff 
“activitiéa’ of the Federal Gavern- 

ment except Marshall Ald and 
‘fixed, charges. 


“The Appropriations Com- 
falttee called for a cut of al- 
most’ cight per, cent in State 
Department funds but sald the 
Volee of America radio broad- 
cants should be- left Intact. 


The-Benviest cut was made in 
the State ‘“Department’s building 
fund and‘ its International In- 
formation and = Education = pro- 
_includes the 


-SOvVi 
The United Nations Secretary Goneral, Mr. Ti 


a 20-year programme to win peace between Ru 
States. He urged thot the first stops bo taken without delay. 


oul 


rygve mitt 


sod 


a and the United 


_ Mr. Lie declared: “It will take'a long series of steps to reduce the tensions of 
conflict and bring the great powers together. 


“| do not belicve in political miracles. [ 
taking tho first stops on this rocd of negotiation and 


can safoly delay 
conciliation. 


“I do not mean by negotia- 
tions surrender or appeasement 
by either aide. IT menn negotia- 
tions which imply honest give- 
and-tuke by both sides. 


“LE have been encouraged by 
recent reenfflrmations from two 
of the leading great powers, the 
United States and the Soviet 
Union, about possibilities of a 
peaceful co-existence between 
then. and between the different 
economic and - political systems 
they represent. . Paar 


“The United Nations .was 
founded upon that belicf, and the 
hope of world: peace depends 
upon Its validity. What we need, 
what the world needs, is a 20- 
year programme to win peace 
through the United Natlons.” 


Mr. Lie said: “I. have been 
trying to help member govern- 
ments settle the question of who 
is to represent China, 


“{ am not doing this because 
the Sovict Union and its neigh- 
bours have refused to attend 
meetings at which China js re- 
presented by Nationalist dele- 


Rates, 


“+ have never thought that 
walking out of meetings and 
staying away from meetings 
wana good way to settle differ- 
ences of opinion,” 


Sorious matter 


Pointing:out that 24 ‘govern- 
ments, including 13 United Na- 
tlons members, have recognised 
the Peking Government, Mr Lie 
said: “It is a serious matter to 
have the Sovict Union . staying 
away from United Nations mect- 
tings, but that is not the first 
consideration. 


“The ‘first consideration is; the 
people of China, There arc 450,4 
000,000 people in that country— 
tiie greatest in the world and Jn 


Equally, | 


the United Nations, in terms of 
population alone. 2 


“The 450,000,000 people c* 
Chino are collectively origina? 
members of the United Nations 
by the terms of the Charter it- 
relf, . : 


“They hive the right to be re- 
presented in the United Nations, 
whatever government has the 
power to ‘employ, the resources, 
and direct the people’ of the 
State in fulfilment of the obliga- 
tlons of membership’ In the 
United Nations. I repent—what- 
ever government is thus qualified, 
regardless of Its idcology.” 


British offorts. 


In ,London, the Forelgn OMce 
confirmed . today that Britain Is 
trying to win a _mafority voting 
strength of the Security Council 
to admit Communist China to the 
United Nations. . : 


On Monday, ‘a British spokes- 
man at Lake Success sald that 
efforts to swing three Council 
members — Cuba, Egypt and 
Ecuador—to support the seating 
of the Chinese Communists had 
met with failure. agit 


A Foreign Office spokesman 
said that the British negotlations 
constituted a commonsense way 
to end .the present deadlock, 
Russia and four of her satellites 
are boycotting UN bodies’ bee 


J cause of the failure to expel the 


Chinese Natlonalists and scat. the 
Communists. : 


The United States has opposed 
Sovict demands for scating the 
Chinese Communlsts, a 


The British ‘negotiations, 
however, were unde 
. the: .Forelgn Seer 


* Ernest Bevin,’ who 


to settle the deadlock. 


Taipeh forecast 


of more 


radio broadcasts to counter” Rus= 
sla's propaganda abroad, 


The Appropriations outlay re- 
presents a cost of S200 for each 
American. 


The House ol! Representatives 
“will debate’ Uhe bill next- week. 
Forcign ald and military as- 
sistance funds were not included 
in the bill, They represent an 


. outlay ‘of $11,502, 451, 053,—Asso~ 


ciated’ Press. : 


MOLOTOV. TAKING 
MORE POWER 


~. Berlin, March 21. 
Russia's former Foreign Min- 
ister, M. Vyacheslav Molotov, 
has ussumed almost all the’ ex- 


ecutive -powers; in the ,Govict |: 


Union to spare the strength of 
the aging Stalin, Sovict Colohel 
Nakivaast, said, Jast night, ac- 
cording to the West German 
news agency, DPA. 

The Colonel wos addressing a 

1. Communist audience in East Ber- 
lin. Marshal Stalin is 70. ° 

It was just-over a year ago 

that Moscow Radio announced 
_ that M, Molotov had-been released 

from his dutics ns Forelgn Min- 

Sater and“hnd: bten: sudceeded by 
. M. Andre Vyshinsky. 

-¥M.. Molotov. remained. a Deputy 
Prime ‘Minister’ of the.’ Soviey 
Union. pe we 

Speculation centred round tho 


suggestion “that tho dismissal ,wats - 


- @ concealed . promotion, and tha 
. MS Molotov had been ‘given over~ 
all: charge , of co-ordinating ‘the. 
industrial: ‘ond ‘military. potential 
* of; Russia. ond-Easte: 


asd operations. 


' Taipoh, March 21. 
‘said today that their first. 


Tho Chinese Nationalists 


landing. 


do not think the world. 


The chict Yugoslav delegate to 
the UN, Ales Bebler, ‘issued a 
statement today: condemning the 
Russlan boycott of the United 
Nations, but asking all govern- 
ments to rise above their partie 
cular interests and voto to expel 
Ae Chinese Nationalist. delega- 
tion. 


Dr. Bebler supported a recent 
memo on this subject by Mr. Lic. 


“In our opinion,” sald Dr. 
Blebler, “the unjustifiable Sovict 
walk-out, which ~ has rendered 
the question of Chincse. repre- 
sentation more diMcult and more 
complicated, 1s one thing, and the 
question itself{—the question: of 
the right of the Chinese people to 
be represented in the United Na- 
tlons—is another."—United Press 
and Associated Press. 


ARMOURED 
CARS. FOR 
~ MALAYA 


; London, March 21. 
The War Minister, Mr. John 
Strachey, told Parliament to- 
day that ‘urgent steps have 
been taken to comply with the 
demand of the military au- 
thorities in Malaya for addi- 
tional supplies of. armoured 

vehicles, : 


Fifty-six armoured vehicles, 
including 25 armoured cars, have 
been sent and a further 60 will 
be shipped this month. The re- 
pair -programme for scout cars in 
also boing .occelerated; and it fs 
hoped. .that 28. .a month will 
shortly be going to. Malaya. ~~ 


“In addition, supplics of armour 
plate and bullet proof glass have 
been sent t> permit the conver~ 
sion of a large number of un- 
armoured vehicles and to provide 
them with a'measure of protec- 
tion. 


“] -miust’ emphasise, however, 
that experiments have shown the 
Impracticability of armouring 
completely a normal load-carry- 
vehicle since the weight involved 
exceeds the maximum IJohd,” he 
added. : een 


Y $.50—"From the 


faire, Whe. > 


2 


' 
as 


§. developing “air 
. which will enable fighter planes’ to «destroy. 
_  bombere at long range.¢ 7 wee 


. The Air Minfiter, Mr, Arthur 


‘| Henderson,* who-tlisclosed. thts: 


stor —Britain'satr—de= 
fence in *Pagliament today, 
also announced” the -develop- 
ment ‘of .advanced ject fighters 
with speeds well over 600 miles 
on hour and.a new and Im- 
proved typeof ‘Jet night fighter. 


These fighters, able to fly at 
extreme heights. are to follow 
the new jet fighter, the Venom, 
which Royal: Air Force squadrons 
will be using next ycar., 


All Brifnin’s day fighter. and 
Rround attack squadrons overseas 
are now re-cquipped with jet 
alreroft, except three squadrons 
tb ne Far Enst, Mr. Henderson 
sald. eae as 


~ "Mr. Henderson ‘said that all the] 


jet night ‘Aghters, now ‘being 
fitted with up-to-date radio and 
radar aids, would also be able to 
fight by day In weather that woula 
ground day fighters. They would, 
therefore, play a vital part in de- 
fence by day and night. : 
Mr. Henderson. disclosed that 
scientists arc: working on a new 
advance “air-to-air” guided mis- 
sile. Fighter plancs, keeping out 
of range of tha enemy's guns, 
could direct this mew weapon 
against the modern bomber. 

Mr. Henderson, who was 
opening a-debate on the Estl- 
mates for next year’s Royal Air 
Force programme, said that 
£ 223,000,000 :will be apent In 
the year.. This is an Increase 
of 26,600,000 on iast year. 
Recruiting, he said, is on the 

whole unsatisfactory and, the 
general level of experience in the 
Service will further decline un- 


“Aiadlo Mong Kong broadcaatas on on 
frequency of 445, Kilocyelea per second 
and on 9,52 metacycles per scoond in 
the 31 metre bund, ; . ‘ 
HK.T. 


P.M. . : 
12,10—Ireadcast: For Bchoola—Great 
+ Clthens.— "Florence Nightingale" 
By Honor Wyatt, (DECIB) 
12.30—"Hong ‘Kong: Calling" —Program 
me Bummary, - 
12.82—Light Variety) with Jobn 
and His Orchcatra, 
1.0f—Alfredo , Cumpoll and Hl Orch 
1.15—News, Weather Report and = An 
naincements, ‘ 
+ 1.25--Interlude, 


Mirby 


2.0 own. ve 
6.00-—"Hong Konz  Calling"-—Progran: 
“me Bummery.  . 
6.02—"Trko I¢ From Here’"—A Variety 
. Programme’, with Joy Nichols, 
Dick Bentley and Jimmy Edwards. 
(uBCTS) . 
€30—La Demi-Heure Francalse, (Btudioy 
7.00—World News: and News Analyste, 
{tendon Relay) 
1,15—Bports ‘Review’ by Dill 


1.80—Speech: by H.R. H. Princess 
Ellsabeth from the London Guild- 
hall at, the Banquet Given by the 
Lord Mayor, (London Relay 
4.00—“From the Editorials." (London 
Relay) AL, 
6.10—"Iong ' Kone Band 
‘ Batts Royal Lelerstor Regiment. 


Shows", | 


Phillips. 


Call*—lat 


raid on the Communist mainland was over 
and boasted that it was but the overture for 
larger operations to come. 

A Navy spokesman said ‘that part of the landing 
force which went ashore. 200 miles South of 
Shanghai had withdrawn. ° 


The remainder joined Na- 
tionalist guerillas who had 
helped them ashore on March 
15.. é s 


(it was not clear whether 
Sungmen, the coustat town selzed, 
had been abandoned to the Com- 
munists. It still ‘might be held 
by Nationalist guerillas). 


The spokesman said the Sung- 
men operation. had proved its 
worth by showing the Natlonalists 
could get ‘a mainland foothold any 
time they. want-3t, raising the 
morale of Natfonalist guerillas 
and. proving that co-operation 
between the Army, Navy and Air 
Force was effective, F 


: i 
Adggressive moves by the Nai 
tlonalists are freely predicted, 
but none knew where the. next 
blow will fall, Tho recently ac- 
tlvated Joint ‘Chiefs of Staff is a 
clear Indication that new amphi- 
blous operationd are in the 
making. i ’ 


Monday’s rald on Shonghal war 
carried ‘out by a strong flect of 
planes. . 
over. tho 


D city for, more<4iery: 5) 
Heavy’: damage ‘was ° claimed 
along, .the - waterfront:.,erew.-at 
ghwo,:: the old’ ‘international 
alr field South ‘of hanghal,:.; 


Air’ Foreo.. headquarters sald]. 


The wor. planes were 


munications, cotton acreage being 
converted to food production aad 
declining profits In-the textile in- 
dustry. : ‘ 6 


China is expected to | produce 
1,700,000 baies dyring the year 
ending In July, the Department 
said. This is one of the small 


| Chinese crops in years and less 


than holt of the quantity produc- 
‘ed In 1936. an : 


Supplies In sight cwa hardly 
maintain cotton mill operation at 
more than 45 per cent of last 
year's level before’ the new crop 
becomes available 2next October, 
{twas estimated. © |g |: 

"The Department nid there were 
caly 609.000 bales available to 
jullls lost December to .run them 
through the remainder of the 
pcason. | a ™, 
. The: Communists were: sald 
hope to Import about 700,000 bales 
to maintain the present level o! 
mill operation, : : 


Only 60,000 bales ‘of American 


to} accompanied -by 


Mr. ‘Strachey was replying to u 
question by Mr. Leonard Gam- 
tnans, Conservative. | ‘ 


A haad grenade thrown at an 
anti-bundit month squad'in ¢ 
Penang street tonight wounded 
the. European officer and - six 
others, | . 


It was the second grenade 
throwing in Penang in a weck.— 
Reuter and Associated Press. 


INDIAN TRADE : 
IN GIBRALTAR 


London, March > > 


, A delegation of Indian ineré | 


chants from Gibraltar. arrivedi 
here. this morning to protest «b 
Mr. Krishna Menon, Indlan High 
Commissioner - In.London, that 
they are belng squeezed .out of 


trade in the fortress Colony. 4 


_ t I 

They complain-that the Gib. 
raltar Allens Traders. Ordinance 
has been administered . harshly 
in recent years. © wheel 


‘The delegation, from the -:Ini 
dian. Merchants . Association,: is 
comp of: two of the leading 
Indlan merchants’ in . Glbraltai’ 
Mr,..Balagm 'Dialdas -- and. ‘Mz, 
Lalchand Mukhi, ‘who .are 

elr toga) ad: 
wiser.—Reuters 6 "0. 


n 


cotton have: reached China thir]. - 


year—-Assoclated * Press. * 


San Francisco, 
JME, Fira . Koren. ower 
“presentative. for . talks ‘with tho 
Central’ People’s ;Goyernment™ ot 
: on: the matter tablish- 


maltted a. fist of ports for ‘visits‘b: 
ships of-the US. After the Uni 
‘Bthtes “reco Bao-D 


° | nant Republic’on Feb 
i thi 


Introdueed "777 by —"Captatni” “David 
Jones, (Reisy from. 9 Dragons 
Club, Kowloon) . 


"—"Madame Dot 


ithe Royal Opera 
Cond, ‘by Oliviera de Fabrifts, 
9.80—The Loridon Promenade Orch, 
10.00—Radlo News: Heel, (London Relay) 
10.18—Wenlher. Report, + * 
10,16—Book Talk + by Alleen Dekker. 
{Studioy . «+1 7 
10.80—"Thursdny Berenada’—A Prostram- 
me of Continuous Music Arranged 
by Detty- Drown. ‘ : 
th.00——"Holt Lights and Bweet Musle”, 
11.16—Weather’ Report, World News and 
from Britain (London 
raed) ‘ 
God Batd the King. | 
11.30—Close  Dovwn,, . 


Red 


AMT be 
1.00—Up With The Bun, . ., 
7.18—Setting Up Exercises, © |. 
1.3l—Musical® Glock, : +. - i EF 
145—FA, Keller. Bhow, a 
6.00—News and Weather Forecnst, ~ 
$.18—Light* Symphonia selestiuns. .. _ 
9.00—Morning Music. - . 
9.30—Console & -Xeybuard, 
10,00—Musle For All. oe 
W.c0—The Four 'Kaights, 
11.18—Walta: Tims” aa 
{1,.20—Parade of Rbythm, «° 

P.M. i ; es 
12.00—H, Btock:' Exchange, de 
12.10--11.B.C, Sahoo! “Broadesst, -« - 
32.23—From The. Films. - 


— 


iffusion 


a 
, 


420—Voeally Yours, 

5.00—Musle" Makers. : 

§.16-—Children'sCorner. 
Timer 


‘| statloned in thé Northern pro- 


“NITES = 


alr”. guided. missiles | 


SOUTH AMERICAN FAR EAST AUTRARSPORT A 


less more men are willing to sta 
for further service, 


.Tho strength of the Royal Alr 
Force on April 1, 1061, is expected 
to bo about 188,000, » compared |, 
with 225,000 a year ago and 202,~ 
.500 ‘today. Today's figure in- 
cludes. 126,000 regulars and 70,500 
national service men (conscripta). 
—Reuter, © 6. a 


FLOGGING 
NOT THE 
“ANSWER 


London, March 21. 
The Government today cm- 
phatically rejected flogging as 
the answer to Britaln’s pre- 
sent crime wave. 


',.Viscount Jowiltt, the’ Lord 
Chancellor, declared in the House 
of Lords: “We have no intention 
of reintroducing it—none what- 
ever.” Last year Parliament hat 
deliberatuly ~ abollsiéd”: flogging. 
and it would be. politically quite 
impossible to go back on that 
now, he sald; . 4 Ne ees 

Lord Jowltt: wagQdqpening 3 
two-day debate anne present 
outbreak ‘of crimes, pf. violenc 
In Britain. | With’?! fowspnpers 
every day reportifg: dasaulty ‘and 
gangster: operations, the -clamour 
for bringlng back. the birch has 
risen in recent weeks.,. , 


Lord Goddard,: tho. Lord .Chicf 
Justice of England, and, other 
Judges have deplored thelr loss 
of power to order flogging, whitch 
they consider a strong deterrent. 


‘Describing the present crime 
wave Os very grave in somo res- 
pects, the Lord Chancellor said | ¢ 
that 'tiey had.to sce whether the | © 
longer sentence which the, Judges 
now had to give’ was “not, a- more 
effective deterrent than the short ‘ 
sentence coupled with, the. cat- _ Agents: 


me long Keng & ‘Stangial Bonk Bldg. ° 27" 7 
long Kon, any an! pAaekeee 

HAND-OVER IN | ek Oe ne cae 
SOMALILAND. |. 


Mogadishu, March 21. 
The handing. over ta- Italy of 
the Northern Somaliland | 


vio AMSTERDAM 
BOOKINGS ACCEPTED: FOR ANY EUROPEAN: 
DESTINATION. 
BRAATHENS S.A.F.E, AIRTRANSPORT A/S. 
DEPARTURES EVERY: FRIDAY 9 A.M.. 
"(Every second Friday tn conjunction with CPA) hn 
For Passage & ‘Freight Ronkings Apply. f0—.," 


ALLEM 
sumt-8 


of Mijortini has been \completed. 
and the British Administratior, 
staff left, for Aden today. 

* Itallan, .troops) who. \will’ bd 


vinces have -arrived at Calkayu, 
on thelr way North. oe 
Itullan troops bound . for the 
Upper Juba arca, in the extreme 
South, have arrived at Buracaba 
A force of 3,000 Italians is garri- 
soning Somaliland under thn 
command of General Arturo Fer- 


‘vara, es J 
withdrawal to 


TRIBUTE SILKS & SATINS: © |. 
BROCADES, ETC... | 
CHEFOO EMBROIDERED LINENS, | 


Ltn ee ee A ee Ce 
_» RAW SILKS — SPECIAL PRICE... 
The the new. 24 Wyndham St. ea Ns Tal. 28382 
frontier line near Sulsul has been, ae thee _ : : 
completed without incident. —~ " 


Reuter. 


Lo Bead Oto ey 
Jardine, Mathesen"G Cai, Lid. | 


esawel 
‘Hong’ Kong Have-be 
eons em——For. hi 


: 


. 


af 


FRAZER YOUNG 


Sees : 
"Tue NEO-ANGLE BATH— 


This beautifol new bath actually” 
provides roomler bathing — spacts 
yet fila into shorter wal] Jengthe 


Consult us on cll— 
Itan ennventlonal baths, Choose 
from gleaming white, end many 


Standard 2 = 


PLUMBING FIXTURES ***""" 


ANDERSEN, MEVER & COMPANY, LTD. 


.-, PAVID. HO 


) GRANT 


erveene s Hye? 


Pa 


If you can drive. it 
with a V-BELT 
you can drive it BEST 


with 


- VEELINK | 


Made in All Standard Sizes. 
Fits All Standard V-BELT Grooves. 
Available in Standard 100-foot Reels. 


Sole Agents—KIU FOONG TRADING co. 


Tel. 


26, Connaught Road, 0. 28408 


4 


GEC 
wr. DOUBLE-ROPE 


\. MADE IN ENGLAND 


OL 
(far 2. 


SV ORM.C! ..ey..e.e. HOISTS 


"| “STERLING” 


For FURTHER ‘INFO 


ave, 


-| Tange oi 


THE: CHINA’ MAIL, THURSDAY, MARCH 23, 


a eA 


drill types 
| To rflect the marly requests 
ifrom users, 
‘Tools: Ltd.,-have added: Heavy 
‘Duty Drilling Machines of 
11" arid 144" capacity to their 
‘range. | 

These tcols are worthy additions 


Wolf Electric - 


‘to the super duty range of “Woit" . 


electric drilling machines and 
further examples of the “Wolf” 
modern devclopment in the direc- 
tlon of power-weight efficiency, 

Special attention has-been pald 
io weur strength and bearing cap- 
acity in vicw of ie power and 
torque required for drilling 1” 
and 1%” holca in steel. . . 

The drill spindics ‘(bored No. 
3M. T.) ore mounted in ‘three 
beurings ‘desi ited to take radfal 
ond drilling thrust load, : 

Drill Statid’" are available In 
two types, one for bench work 
and.one as o girder cramp. 

Full detalls of these new drills 
san be obtained from Wolf Elec- 
tile Tools Ltd., Hanger Lane, 
Haling, London, W. 5. 


- Specification 
NWwéeD. NW10D. 
i Drilling capacity in 
Steel .. «1! - iA" watts 
a Drilling capacity in 
wood - ae” 3” 
. Spindle speed run- 
ning ight 300 270 
Spindle “ speed on 
Joad 230 160 . 
Watts input run- 
ning light 350 watts 350 watts 
: * Watts input:om full 
© 1180 watts 1150 watts 
Over Length 
20" 20” 
Distance from cen- 
of spindle to outer 
2 2" 
“Nett Woight ...... 
eveceeess 28% Ibs, 28% Ibs 


_ Electric soldorguns 

A new Introducticn by Wolf 
‘sa range of electric solderguns 
which they claim will overcome 
hitherto common criticism of this 
type of equipment. 

Industrial. soldering - require- 
im@aty have long called for selder-_ 
ing tools which will reach gperat- 
ing temperature quickly, + will 
maintain 6 correct constant heat, 
prove economical in current con- 
tumplioa and ore “easy In the 
hand” for long production periods. 

Particular attention is directed 
lo the off-straight hand grip 
which lends to much more com- 
fortable contrel. By ingenious 
arrangement within the heating 
clement, the heat fs localised 
around ‘the copper bit and witn 
the climinatlon of wasted heat 
areas, ccnsiderable economy in 
current consumptica has been 
effected.- 


full 


lond .. 


easing .. 
. 


IMPORTANCE OF SOIL 
CONSERVATI 


The sciontific resources of: ¢ 
of soil conservation in Bri 


than over before. 
As a contribution to this 


wre 


problem new inventions 


in agrictiltural equipment are being develop- 


ed in Britain. 


Two of the latest are an earth 
leveller or blade’ terracer ‘and a 
mounted disc plough. After ex- 
tensive trials at home and in 
many parts of the world, these 
new pieces of cquipment have 
been added tothe system of 
farm mechanisation being deve- 
loped by the Ferguson Company 
of Coventry whose 251,100,000 
dollar legal battle with Ford's in 
America has recently: made world 
headline news, ° A 

f eae hats, 8 
-Both - implements -, have wide 
applications ‘abroad .and-are. des~ 
tied to play ao significant part 
in. the development. of Colonial 
ngriculture. An Smportant fea- 
ture comman to both is that they. 
fncilitate good fanning -in archs 
which are ‘handicapped by awk- 
ward terrain and ‘extreme clima- 
tie conditions. ; 


G 


Movement of ‘earth has always 
been one-of the costliest jobs lo 
forming. With the Ferguson carth 
leveller soil can-be moved for 
building,’ grading,’ road-making 
surface drainage,. or, back filling 
trenches, almost as casily as 
ploughing. 


At the same time tendency to- 
wards excessive. temperature rist 
fs avoided and this in turn pro- 
longs heating ‘element life aad 
snves oxydlsation of the copper 
bits. Wolf -solderguns can be 
supplied for . the following 
voltages:—26, 50, 100/110, 115/130, 
200/220, '225/250, and each Gun 
Is fitted with’ six fect of 8-core 
cable. ’ | 

Models ore/available for a wide 
joses from’ Nae in- 
strument‘te heavy duty work. 
Full detatls obtainable from Wolf 
Electric Togls Ltd., Pioneer Works, 
Hanger Lane, Eallng, London, 
W.5.; 5 pe ee : 


GRAY 


“MUNSTER SIMMS” HAND -BILGE PUMPS; 


Steel feveller 
The leveller fs of steel con 
It is deslgned fo 


by a 
gives finger= 


th 
oF the tractor. 


‘point of lubrication. 


wearing alloy steel, 

replaced merely 

of five Volts. T 

blade con be gu 

of ninc positions. by manual 
lever. i : 


- Maximum a 
tion Is 45°, 


4, ‘be 
le in either direce 
hile, the blade may 


4 


“MARINE DIESEL ENGINE PARTS 
MARINE DIESEL ENGINES 
MARINE GASOLINE ENGINES 


Aare rats 


OME! cece cece Wall 2! mm PUMPS | 


ORLLAM" 0.2.2.6. CONCRETE. 


Fe tn 


VIBRATORS: . 


“MMATIONAL" ...... DIESEL “MARINE ; BATTERIES”. 


“NATIONAL” ... 
“EDISWAN” .... 
“BRIGGS” oo... eee 


"BRIGGS"... 


By 


ELECTRICAL | EQUIPME 


i+, AUTOMOTIVE “BATTERIES -:|: 


ult 


ENT 


“AUTOMOTIVE LACQUERS 
WATER PAINTS 6:5 


| along 


be ‘tilted from level to 12%". 
Change of pitch which governs 
depth control is obtained by pre- 
cision control mechanism on the 
top link. The leveller con also 
effect big savings in cleaning 
barns and yards. In the Britlah 
Isles its cost is only £32, 

“Overseas, the leveller has been 
found ideal for building contour 
terraces “which have become 
the standard practice in soll 
conservation. ‘The terraces, built 
contours, (interrupt the 
downward ‘flow. of. water and 


conduct it gently olong the, con- 


tour,, thereby preventing rapid 
run-off, ; 

This not only prevents the 
washing away of top soil, but 
also ensures that most of the 
water !s absorbed into the soil 
ond Is availnble to subsequent 
crops. In some areas, the cost 
of terracing has been reduced by 
over a third followlng the use 
of the Ferguson Earth Levelier. 


Applications 


ing_an: 
Ig. ing 


bylepicyclic reduction gearing. 


A-F 
besa 


ON PLAN | ~ 


he world arc being focussed on the problem 
ticsh Colonial territories to a greater oxtent 


tractor scat. 


- “Following” “the. _ successfull 
‘adaptation of gas-turbine. units; 


-designed—in —collaberation —with.|_..__.___. 


P9807 7 


. WORTHINGTON - 


WS 


: ; ae SEs i ae ea 
“PUMP: HEADQUARTERS" 
CENTRIFUGAL |. POWER. 
+ STEAM-—~- ROTARY 

_PUMPe—COMPRESSONE+OIKeEL endinen = 


STEAM POWER EQUIPMENT—-DONGTRUCTION KQUIBMENTS 


"Agentay on 


; ANDERSEN, MEYER & COMPANY, LTD. 


DAVID. HOUSE’. 


os 


Bikes 


evens 
SSiiiet 


Pockago Air Conditlonors 
Evaporative Condonsers 
Commercial Air Conditioners — 
Raw Water Ico Plants | : 
Reciprocating & Centifrugal Compressors” 
* Absorption Refelgeration Machines - 
‘ Liquid Coolers =~ Brine, Water, ote., 
“ Lubrleating Oil Plait Equipment 
es Refrigeration ‘Condensers 
Stems — Jot Vacuum Units 


of ‘outstanding success under a 
very wide range of soil conditions, 
and has been used for. burying 
crop’ residues from sugar and 


maize, 

The flexibility of this new in- 
vention is shown by the fact that 
the plough is available with two 
or three discs which can be raised 
or lowered hydraulically from the 


HONG KONG - 


‘TEL, 26906 CABLE ADDRESS “CARSANHEAT" 


a ee 


| KNURLING TOOL 
oes (ern rane ae 


ee hes 


MARINE GAS 
~ TURBINES 


for. tae Propulsion et . meter : enn be he 
gunboat, the miralty ag ra 
decided to extend its study of Holders 
the 'gas-turbine power field’ by A : af a 
placing @ pare Pola Hf = a Oe ‘ ; 

en, Sons, and Co. 45 0 : ‘ ae 
Bedford, for the construction ’ KNURLS 
ofa ail gas pete and 7 1 . : roe 
generator design ‘or power- ope : : 
ing the auxilliary services| _ 4 ‘Diamond Pattern. 
aboard ship, including lighting,| . °° - i : Wang RE Ae 
heating, and the operation of : 
winches. | ; 

The new: set, 


Knutling — ‘Tool 


1, OF . eee 
”, Straight-line Pattern 


“ Course-Medium-Fin 


which is bein; 


tho Bristol Acroplane Co. will 
consist’ of aa axial compressor 
of 4; 1 pressuro ratio, delivering 
to on annular-type 
changer,, a. compressor turbine}. .- fe 


and a free power turbine. The a a 
A. MI 


generator will be driven through 
(+ BSR 


108, Des Votux ‘fd, C. 
we, 


(Opp. Centrpl Market) ©: ; 


. nas 


Tho performance rating of the 
unit Will. bo a maximum continu- 
ous rating of 1,000kW., with a 
10-min,' rating of 1,200kW., an 
estimated consumption - of diesel 
ofl os fuel of only 1.07lb./kW.-hr. 
at full Jond, a maximum = ges 
temperature of 720deg. C.,. an 
operating life ‘of 50,000 hr., with 
major overhaul periods of 5,000 
hr., and minor overhaul periods of 
1,000 hr. - : : 

“The set will be capable bf 
operation in both temperate and 
tropical ‘conditlons. It is expect- 
ed that the set will be ready for 


A 


, 


ety wets 


CARTER &. SUTTON LTD. 
BOLE DISTRIBUTORS FOR HONG KONG & SOUTH CHINA... 
ROOM 230A HONG KONG & SHANGHAI BANK BUILDING 


re) 
vas 


heat ex- ee SS Rey : oe 


fe 


Speclally flown from Rome to i 
Acsociated Press photo shcwe Popo Plus 
the Conzistory Hall fer cecret and sem 
With Hic Holiness fs Monsignor Enrico Dante, 
Rellgiove Ceremonice, ‘They are ‘prece 


4K MAN'S VIEWS: 


INDIA. AND 


ondon tn the De Havilland four-jet Comet alriiner, thi 
XI on his way from the Vatican private cpartments to 
J-public consistories for five Holy Year canonisatlons. 
Prefect of the Vatican Ceromonial Staff for the 
ded by helmeted Nobla Guérds. (AP Photo). ‘ 
ea te, 


PAKISTAN. 


Cree eter 


23,, 1980, 


AY, MARCH 


Why. hag the British Govern-.| ¥ 


pola bt a 4 ae ecoltoitile 
crigis, se’ Ke defence 
force to Hong Kong? The island: 
-of Hong Kong | is a ‘pleasant 


a a ‘place with” ‘be diitital “accnery;- ; 


fERY NEAR TO. WAR 


Disturbod relations between India and Pokistan, following the recent coni- | 


munal disturbances, hive brought the threat. of wat 
Thot is the opinion of Mr. Victor Mamak, Hong Kong 
y sogn leave in New Delhi, as expressed in a letter to the 
hiig risen from 230,000 bales In 


* Mamak, who spent two 
> tivestigating the causes 
( the present strife, is: convinced 
ant India docs not want war with 
bakistitn andl will avoid an armed 
lngh nas much as possible, 
But Pakixtan has showh no de- 
ire ‘to co-opetute with it 
eighbour, he, claime, and but, for 
Mrime Minister,’ Nehru’s timely 
init to West Bengal, the recent 
iots In th a would have pro- 
Ruced very serious repercussions, 
While Mr. Momak denies that 
he gituation has produced chaos 
nd confusion in the industrial 
hutlook of India, he says that 
erjous dislocation was indeed 
axed jn the economics of the 
wo Dominions os a direct result 
partition. = 
“India was .an economic unit 
hefory partition, ‘The jute and 
Lutton producing areas were even- 
. distributed in the provinces 
te; and were ‘Ilnked to- 


act 
and road,” he 


| 
sether by rall 
writes, : 
“A single economic entity was 
neconomleally, divided Into two 
mits, A certain percentage - of 
echnicnl personnel migrated from 


pne--Doiminion ...to_the.other, and | 


contributed to a certain dmount 


of industrial. dislocation. 


Efforts for Pact 


Mr, Mamak says that during. the. 


Nast two yoearg Indin made every 
oneeivable. effort,to, arrive, at a 
sormprehensive , irade agreement 
vith Palistan,, But at every stuge 
H ore put obstacles in the way, 
ind refused to hohour several 
ureementy, . Which she had fore 
nekly ctitered Into with India, 
‘The last of these ngrecinents 
was. signed in Karachi on June 
24, 1949. ‘Under this agreement, 
alcistan agreed to male available 
Indian 400 milion bales of raw 
Nite and 450,000 ‘bales of raw 
cotton,’ India’ .ageeed to, supply 
80,000 tonsiof fron‘ nnd elect. She 
not only met the requirements cf 
Pakistan, in spite of her own de- 
pendence on Imports from bard 
currency areas, but also stepped 
u her export of conl to the 
Muslin: state, . ; 
Me. Mamek. 3 
“aidarabte importance to 
tan's refusal fo devalue her 
rupee after the Britlsh. Cam- 


undertaken. laa. 


{bad 


mohwealth general.” devaluation | P, 
mR... 


She ignored the original parity 


[with sterling In, terms of which 


all settlements of foreign cx- 
change were made between India 
and Palkeistan, he sald. Pakistan 
decided to maintain, its original 
parity with the dotlar -and thus 
overvalued her cutrency .against 
sterling arid the Indlan rupee to 
the detriment pf, Indlah-Pakjstoa 
commercial: and trade relations, 


“Patdstag raw jute immbdintes 
ly becahie far mone expensive 
tha Indian jute, espeplally after 
Pokistan hid fixed a minimum 
selling price, The Dominion made 
it Wegal for any person to cx- 
change Pakistan rupee for In 
dion rupoa except at the rate of 
exchange notified by ber, 

“Those measures had the effect 
of stultttying Indo-Paklstan trade, 
Not only wus any fresh purchase 


of raw jute made Jmpossible, but, 


out of 1,200,000 bales: which had 
been purchased by Indian mills 
before devaluation, 500,000 bales 
Which had. still to come to India 
were held up by Pakistan. 

‘ “Even jute front, Assam, in 
trait thfougiy Pakistan’ to In+ 
dia, was stopped.” , 
Miro Mpmak~— gays ~~ it- became 
evident after thege  actlons that 
Pakistan was deliberately forcing 
India to agcept ber exchange rate, 
even though it bod pot been ce~ 
dered ‘the International Mofe- 
tary ad. it became, clear to in- 


sdustridligts : in India “thot, apart 


from obtaining supplies of coal 
from Indjp, Pakistan had little 
intentiod of allowing , any other 
trade ‘to take place between the 
{wo countries, ° : Of 
“In. these, circumstances,” he 
explains the Government of In- 
dio had no option put to atop the 
the supply, of coal to Pakistan. 
In so doing, however, {it made 
clear that. these supplies would 
be resumed once trade between 
ihe two states returned to nor- 
mal.” : 
- Mr, Mamak says that India had 
anticipated some such imposse 
and had adopted measures to step 
up her own Jute production which 
shot up from 160,000 bales jn 
1048 to 280,090 dales in 1949. The 
expected. production for this year 
rT) fake be ot a Rene 
. India .is.-not’ dependent ona 
akiktan Pepin ee her textile 
n.. : 


roduclion . 


valy itcar. 
businessmdn now 
"China Mail.” 


1948 to 280,000 bales. For the 
first holt of this year the’ Govern 
ment has already allocated | for- 
eign exchange for the import of 
100,000 bales from various counr 
trics. Provisions for more foreign 
exchange for the second half have 
also bocn made, 

“Increase of cotton | production 
an the long-term solution fo MM 
In the gap of nearly 
bales between Iridia and require 
ments is under consideration,” 

“Therefore, not only. the jute 
and cotton mills in India have 
been and are still functioning fs 
usual, but there Is-absolutely no 
danger of their closure inthe 
Coresccable future,” sald = Mr, 


‘} Mamaok. 


Trado balance | 
Mr, Mamak claime that do- 
vatuation has not advorsqly 

‘affected India’s export trade. 

“In fact, the result tp the con~ 
trary. 

“During the months of Novem 
ber and December 1949, Indio hu 
a favournble balance — of trade: 
During these two months India's 
exports stood at the record leve} 
of-50-crores. a_month.as.. against, 
25 crores In October, Tea exports 
did very well throughout tha 
year. The increase In the export 
of cotton: plece, goods was un- 
doubtedly helped by devaluation. 


The export of commodities’ which | 


found a market in Pakistan. has 
already peen diverted to other 
countries," he says. ; i= 
There is no donger .of com 
munism in India. ‘The Communist 
Party In India is ‘almost insigni- 
cant, but a war. between India 
dia and Pakistan would juny 
doubtedly strengthen the hands of 
the present Indian Communist 
Party and it Would ultimately 
dominate ai others,” be sald, 
Touching on India’s current 
relations with foreigners in the 
country,’ Mr, Mamak’ writes thrt 
there. is absolutely no antl- 
foreign fecling in India. 
“Porcigners, especialy Britons, 
are treated withthe traditional 
Sndian- courtesy ond politeness, , 
“Freedom from Foreign rile 


1,600,000 |. 


reason Why. the, Governmont 
4s makIng so great an effort ‘to 
sdfeguard It. . . ; 


For a 100 years ‘Hong Kong 
has been the. British trading post 
ideglly situnted . for commerco 
with Chino—though at times 
much of {td trade has been de- 
Gected nway to SHdnghal. Groat 
fortunes have botn rhode ot Hong 
Kong. Xet this also is not: the 
reason why the Labour Govern- 
‘ment, hay sent, soldiers to defend 
it. It is doubtful how. much, the 
Wealth of Hong feng actually 
helps the British home economy, 
on which the burden of this de- 
fence must ultimately fall, 


. Nor_is.it ontirbly. true that tho 
renson for defending Hong Kony 
becouse it js a part of the 
ritish Commonwealth,  Cer- 
tainty the Commonwealth cannot 
pe attacked with. |Impunity, but. If 
here bad not been weighty rea- 
ond for our rémaining in Hong 
. Kong, it might have been chdéaper 
ind easier simply to hand it over 
to the Chincae Government. 


Why, then, Js such 
urmed force kept here? 


a Jarge 


once sald 
{ree man 
. tded why he 
was foing things, and':that he 
understood why tings were 
belhg, dope. to. him. (Anybody 
who finds hlmself in the Hong 
rant Defence Force tins been 
cau, i up by, and is playing a 
Hart lh, a gery great historical 
rama of our, time, 


Background of history 


The diMcult thing is to ‘sea: it 
as a whole in all its cpmplexity 
and to grasp the significance for 
the whole fn cach small indivi-+ 
dual part. 


Yet it is well. worth while 
mals} the effort of gcecing our- 
selves against the background of 
history. To do. this the necd 1s to 
delve into the history ‘of the Cal- 
nese revolution, The next three 
or four articles, whl try to sketch 
the picture in its broad outline, 


evolution hug been going on 
for p Iong while, in China, , Be- 
case f4r the last cedtury China 
hos been very .weok we arg apt 
to forget what p great unl it 
4e.. The Chinese jare. the lorgest 
nation in the Word. One in every 
Aye people in the world & ‘a 
Chingse. Some historians ink 
that the Chinese haye fad. the 
most ndvanced civilisation of any 


people since while other nations. 


ave had their ups and downs, 
the Chindse have maintained a 
yery, bigh level of .civillzation 
continuing for more than 2,000 
years, ~ 

China fs a huge land moss and 
the great majority of its people 
have been peasants, Large ems 
pires populated . chiefly by, pen- 
santry have always devodloped 
elviligations different from those 


}-of--island --conntrics..such - a8-Bri-. 


tain, where the civilisation « has 
been _g ‘commercial one. Tho 
countries “with which Ching has 
to be compa are the (other 


Innd <mpires—Russia, Germany, ped 


and -Indla., ‘ 


Bot as a lind: empire China 


developed . »pecullarity which 
was ‘imteréat. trom val “¢ther, land 


pe 
wn, th history, From 


a 
h 


drush,” | 


ee 
(ol : 

pre- ht finale fears 
fossi Clvil Service 


exist. 


ty 

. Nourished 

mop. tie 89 $i 
, Great. At the 
the 


su ty 
a: OF Heaven, 


wi 
mperd Me 
very. province, was 
each digtrict th 
. calm thes 
ly better Boy 
er country Jn 
he 19th Cen 
B Wore hot slwayit 


calm, 


There have been many Chinese 
Dynastics; The main ones were 
the Han, Tang,Sung, Yuon Ming, 
ond. the last one--tho Ching, .or 
Manchu, On the average, Dynas- 
fies lasted two or three hundred 
years, Ultimately, they fell. 


. There. would be a’ period, . of 
choos. After that,.a new Dynase 
ty would rise. Historians today, 
looking behind the pageant of 
the yise Grid fall. of | Dynasties, 
think that they can perceive the 
cause, The reason for this rhy- 


‘Mud ‘into 
hard Road - 


America — as inventive as 
always -~-has discovered. how 
fo turn mud, even the most 
logging mud, into a hard 
reliable surface’ in a matter of 
hours. ae irons 

That. field bogging down the 
most powertul tractor,, .that lane 
ankle deep in clutching mirr.... 
even that stretch of sand left 
Blared by water by the receding 
tido—nll can be: transformed into 
a surface pendy '-to" fake thé 

| heaviest yond traffic: merely” 
the rapid application of cals, 
‘ Explaining ‘the  “drying-out” 
Process jo mone detail, Kay Mur- 
ray describes how chemista and 
engineers of , Massachusetts In- 
stitute of Technology, after’ three 
Yoars’ research, have perfected ‘a 
chemical treatment having much 
the same ctién os that whi 
takes. placq in manufacturing 
‘athatic rubber, Once, - 1 
emical is applied,-soil . Whi 
was previously 40 pér cent wa- 
ar ete as _ eae ck 
vo bours ce ‘ean 
take the welght of o standard 
heavy American, far, In a week, 
It develope the”: etrerigth of. con- 
ercte. ¢ 


Jy’ by 


that, your ral-soakod’ lawn 
Mn winter. 
The cost of, the, drying cheralcal 
leat present—iod high to ene 
able jt to be put on the sivilian 
market. an eS th 


Jara, Domestic. 


Copper Tubes & 
Cenint Colowtl 


Si 
aad ee 
Austr 
ich 
ie ghd Al 
+ Other 
'] many’ 


| Clout 


a 


Jae tend ?n 
» When, it 
Wie, 


reise Malrly 
byt rebeliions contigied, 
out Wain the By: ay Ya, 
the, é 


0 ‘c 
der, 
8, Sea Bc 
grad 
{ no hain Bs 
sa oe bee 
cate 4 stare oer 
ould the, a 


bes 
: kBidden City, at |e 


ere { D: 


eS. 
caused. - changes . 
Chinese ' Society ana, Chinese 
psychology, though the ., change 
only came -about . very , slowly. 
Tho upshot.of this complication 
was that the Matchu , Dynasty 
took on abnormally long “time 
dying, because it waa for a'tlme 
supported by Western. ald. It 
collapsed fholly 14 1032.7 'Tts fall 
Began the revolution ‘which Bro- 
fuced , first the |. Kuomintang 
Government, and now, the Com- 
| Squbist Government | Which has 
just come into power, : 
(To be continued). . 


Nazis hide 


in S. America 


_ GON 
17, Kayoinatiy, Bidg, 


ee 


PRESSURE 


, 


ME 


GE 


! 


AN 


f 
AL WO 
AL OFFICE). © OV. 

Tels: 20398, 20895. 


4 


aS Lib 


U. SPALINGER& CO.LTD. 
‘WIRING DEPARTMENT. 
WORKSHOF: 


3A, Wyndham Street 
(Next To S.C.M. Post Bldg.) 


” thet: 32765 


36, Tung-lo-wan Road 


Tel: 3431 


nona Kona 


1 


Estimates Submitted For Domestic & 


~ What happened to the scores | 


of Nazi leaders of war-time 
Germany who  disnppeared 
without any: trace of their 
death, or whereabouts, at the 
end of the war? 


‘Phe answer, as far as a good 

Dumber of them are concern! at 

any. Tate, is that. jthey jwed to 
south merica, where U 

still in hiding,’ | ieee) 


STERLING CABLE 


‘EN! : of this, came, xecently : 


when ‘the mother-jn-law of a for- 
mer Naz! Gaulelter stated before 
the lan Peopica’ Court, that 
the former Nazi “boss” ha 
with his family to South America 
as Inte og the autumn of 1948, 


‘The Court belleved that thls, 
and other evidence given, indjca- 
tes that other top Nazis wanted 
badly for war crimes in Germany 
tnd. Aystia, tnay also have gone 
“underground” in the Bame coun- 
try, : : 

The most wanted miin, id the: 


SS Colonel, Skérzeriy—the spe 
Mussoll 


ropa 


ittings. 
y Powder. 


att 


Ded |. 


Sa eee ee 
WRTEEN 


| | SUPPLIES: © 
ILL SWitci¥ékan Li, 
Switch & Distribution Gear, 


-* Cabtes.. 


‘Nell 8 Celling'Tight 


~ AIR-CO. 


fectured by ae 


AF 


bby. molor 250 volts, aint 
ed ell neortary a 


CONTACTUM, 


Industrial Eleétriéil Installations, 


rene 


LrD,, 


‘Wiring Accessories. ae 


Pr, ae ee ed 


ae PL ce 


| GREAT 


0, ep. MONNonE conbtirs Lr. - 


vee ane 


aeerd ot 


i at 
beth fretised 
Cae two: 


nape, Atty 


Whe. oot} 


clon, Condenser, Evaporator, 


8 ; 
TIENTSIN — 
WASHED RUGS 
and : 


LARGE STOCK” 

re OF 
TIENTSIN CHEMICAL 

WASHED RUGS. 


4 


ee 


WHOLESALE G RETAIL’ 


AT FACTORY PRICES 


SAR 
" CURIOUS WARES 
a 


H WHOLE SALE & RETAIL §f 
: 


CHEN BROS. | 


CURIOS CO. 


21 Wyndham St. 
HK. ; 


+ 
TIENTSIN CHEMICAL 
WASHED RUGS 


‘FIRST QUALITY AT 
FACTORY PRICES 


VISIT 


GREAT EASTERN - 
RUG CO. : 


© Hankew Rd. (Greund Vloer) 
Kowloon Tel, 59109 


Agents . 
NONGKONG & AWANGHAL LACE CO. 
(LOON KRE) 


Craver mente 


de NORWOOD jects 
i my ‘ 


Rprcial Peve 
Best ire 


; with the 
amating 


Swivel heod-~ 
CALL ON Sy 


. roa 
fnke Metirbuters- © DEMONSTRATION 


TOFOTO & CO. 


Reom 100, Fae Hot Nidg, 
12/14 Queen's Rd. C. Tel. astat. 


Youheerall right, but 
do not anderstand? 


SONOTONE, 


Sole Distributors: 


ED LAMB & CO. 


=" Ron’ 300,"8ze Hol Bldg. 
12, Queon’s Road, C. 
Tel, 36181. 


mene als can he 
*,mudo much mor 
BEAUTIFUL & GLAMOROUS 
hy going to 
. HOLLYWooD 
BEAUTY ‘PARLOUR 
16 Cameron Road, 
Kowloon. 


(Toleph 59249 
LADIES IL, 


Cold Wave .....,. 
Machineless P, Wave 
Shampoo & Set foe aees 
GENTLEMEN . : 
Haircut, Shave & Sham- 
Roo 


‘$25.00 
20.00 
° 4.50 


* $ 3.50 


UNION HOUSE 


221-223, Nathan Road, Kowloon 
~ Telephone: 66828 | ..:.. 
Cable Add: “UNIHOUSE"” 


Situated at conyeniont ’ 

and residential contre,‘ *. 

Modern Equipment. and... 
Excellent Service.. 


Comfortabld and’ pleasant 
surroundings. se 


Call or phone for reservations. - 


LOW: PRICE! 
_ Calcufators,. ‘Typewriters: 
. Carbons:.& Ribbons. ‘ 


f fon St. Tels 2050 
‘Repalring Service, 


| alving 


~Inapection cordially 


CLEANING & MENDING | 


GOOD YEAR RUG CO. 


Room 208, Ist Floor, 
6, Hankow Road, Kowloon, 
: Tel. 58962, ‘ 


D. & P. READY IN 4 HOURS 


AIR CONDITIONED 
Pine Grain Developing Printing 
+ and Enlarging fer your lm. 
QUERN'S ROAD, C,, TEL. 27836 
OPPOBITE QUEEN'S THEATRE 


RODO HOUSE 


240, Tal Po Rd, Kowloon, Tel:sov76 - 


Cable Address; “RODONOUBR” 
A high class medern hotel, alming at 
aclete and visitors the best 
corvice af moderate rstes, Private Mining 
teem «serves excellent Chinese ane 
Rerepean food 

je fecation te quiet and ce 

‘Ideal fer quests whe wleh to 
home temperarily in Mengken: 
special monthly cates, 
414 per day, 

“YOU ‘FEEL AT HOME IN ROD! 
HOUSE” fe eur mette, 


Y. H. Chan, (Manages). 


(At Junctlon Tal Fo Koad & Castle Peak 
Road, Shamehulpo, Buses Nos, 6, 6A & 11) 


inient. 
jo thelr 
Ask fer 
Htarting = from 


CAMERA & ACCESSORIES 
With stepped-up postwar prodaction, are 
now. reaching the market-In increasing 
Quantily, Meet the Leica new ‘at. your 
Nearest franchised dealer, - , 
EEE nee eS 


Planes 
Musical 


Per 
Muale, 


Cramophene. Re 
corde, Plan 


Tuning & Rew 
pairing. 


Please a 
call at . 


KING’S MUSIC CO. 


5, Chiu Lung Street, HLK. 
—--— Telephone!” 304397~ a4 


——JUST. ARRIVED--. 


DE-LUXE © 
“EMBOSSED . 


RUGS 


CARPET: 
INDUSTRIES 


63 Austin Road, Kowloon 


SERVICE TO OFFER 
DENNIS & CO., LTD. 
‘(White Ants Extermination Dept.) 
Offérs “service In. White Ants 
Treatmont, Just make a call on 


the telephone and’ our Technician 
will be at your service for. Pree 


Inspection. ., 4 
: 329138 & 93324, 


A.WHITE & CO, 


Photo Studia 


ad 


3 


Suddenly scared, young De. 
eof Lord Bessborough, turne aol 
Sarah Ponsonby, Lord Bessboro 
bouquet to Madame Vincent A 
dent,,at a Franco-British Socic 
couple In Lons'on’s Burlington 


HK Biolog 


make field 
The Hong Kong Biologica 
' gotic and productive: 


‘Fung Yuen -valley on 
Specialists in most of the 


Canada is makifig'a 
peaceful application - 
an official long-range 


‘| -- Tat solving the proble 


TThe first 


<mond Browne, great grandson 
de for consolation: whlila tittle 
ugh’s great-niece, presents her 
urlol, wife of the French Presi 
ty reception for.tho visiting 
House. (AP Photo). : 


ical Circle 
excursion | 
1 Circle mado an cner- 
field oxcursion up tho 


Sunday. . 
aspects of biology were 


present to observe. and comment on the na- 


tural phenomena enc 


The quiet valley was found 
to have much of the charm of 
an English scene in springtime. 


Near the sea shore at tht en- 
trance of the valley o rare but- 
terfly. " was seen, This was 
Hippolimnan bolina, a beautifui 
purple te black insect with six 
small white spots on the uppe 
surface, . 


“* Among the paddy flelds mone 
specimens ‘of the red peacock 
butterfly, Precis Almana were 
found settling with their winga 
spread and a few specimens of 
the closely allied species »Precisx 
Lemonias were also present. 


1 

Interest was stimulated by the 
capture of a pretty snake, the 
Buffestriped - Keelback Natrix 
stolata, 


This harmless’ snake is com- 
‘mon In the Colony, and Is parti- 
cularly inoffensive in that it very 
seldom bites, and stands, with 
Rood: tomper, much -handiln; 
The Keelback has a wide ran 
“from” Peninsular~India~ to South 
China,” It is diurnal In habits 
und feeds mainly on amphibia. 


Arsembling for a final. con- 
—sferente=members-hadsmuch-to; 
exhibit. Among the . plants 
‘gathqrod was an Intoreating | 
misparasite of the Lonanthus 
olée In ful? bloom. it was 
sucking .the Ilfe out of a 
struggling young orange tree. 


ratt ” 
> Many unfdentified but beauti- 
ful. small flowering: plants -were 
gathered from the "bunds" divid-. 
ing the small paddy ficlds, A 
young, plant of BryophylNum was 
collected," ‘This interesting plant 
opngated by ity leaves, 
plete“young plants arise even if 
the leaf ts merely hung in’ a) 
room, provided the atmosphere is 
not too dry. are 5 


The younger members * of the. 
party.had caught some small fish 
for thejr aquaria. in the pleasant 
stream that flowed through © the]: 
shady dell In which lunch was 
eaten. | Pan ‘ : 

The catch included four goblez, 
a minnow-like sh with a -black 


RARE." OPERATION 


SAVES. BABY: 


"Melbourne, March /21: 


an opening betwee. 
and intestine. -- ss 
.- It, wana rare, cperation that 
has -beén qgitormed B 
sbefure-in Melbpurne. - 
‘he! biiby,, Darrel! Young. 
rematurely: born. ~ Hi 


pening. : is 
For.13 daysiatterithe ovurntior: 
rsoa' continued, to feed “the baby 
THis: Weigh 


ountered, . 


spot near the tail and a small 
shrimp, A large cray-fish“was 
seen, but to-make the story 
to type “got away.” 

Returning along the main 
foot-path, members = disturbed 
many skinks, This’ famlly | of 
lizards has the largest number’ of 
species in the Colony, and Is “in 
attractive ‘and colourful creature 
loving to bask in the warm 
‘afternoon’ -sun- on- convenient 
rocks or stones, But In spite of 
Qying ‘tackles by enthusiastic 
members .all the  skinks seen 
evaded capture und‘ closer  ob- 
servation, : 


Finally ., at Taipo market a 
handsome = specimen of -_ the 
Japanes . Scops-Owl, Otus 
Japonicos was purchased. 


Among new members wel- 
somed . ware Mr, amf Mk. 
Stonyer and party, and Captain 
Raymond Hill, FRGS, FZS. 


An excursion is planned to the 
Tung Chung district_of_Lautao.. 
“Island “on “April 2, é 


_BRITON.FREED 
IN WARSAW 


( Warsaw, March: 21, * 
“Four hours after receiving 9 
British protest, "the Polish au~ 
thorities today released a Bri- 
‘tish subject from Krakow’ Pri- 
son, * : ' 

Sir Ronald Gainer, British Am- 
bassader, protested to the Polish 
‘Foreign Ministry this merning 
against the selzure of Polish-born 
Otakar Kornhauser, who had dis 
appeired on February 2 as. he 
‘was prevaring to return to Bri- 
-taln. by alr, ‘ " 
. The six-week old mystery of 
Kornhauser's: failure:to.catch the 


Plane was explained yesterday In |- 


a Polish note. 'to the Embassy 
saying that he had been: arrested, 
No reason for the ‘arrest was 
given, : : 
Kornhauser was tho third West- 


sular, -oMicial,.’. sentenced ‘to 12 
yearn’. {mprisaament. at-Stettin In 


French Cone | 


er¥da 


bid for world leadership in-the 


of atomic: energy. with . 
programme which aims 
oF using atomic enorgy | 


phase of the programme is ‘planned to.” 


take at least 10 years, by..which-time some 
solid achievements are expected. 


American arid British scfen- 
tists, who played a major ‘role 
In getting Canada’s atomic ex: 
periments started during the 
war, are being kept fully in- 
formed on the progress -of the 
Canadian research, which in 
volves not only uranium, but 
also hydrogen and other poten- | 
tially Yissionable -matcrials. | 

The. Canadian atomic ‘pro- 
gramme. has always been morc 
closed linked to..the British than |. 
the American, and it Is expected 
that this liaison will ‘continue 
since Britain also stresses peace~ 
time rather than wartime aoppli- 
cations of ‘atomic energy. 

The bulk of the work once 
done by British scientists in 
Canada {s now being done by 
Canadians, although in 
casex British scientists, sent here 
for limited stays, have chosen to 
remain ‘permanently, 

High Government officials here 
believe that. atomic energy may 
play as.deelsive a part in Cana- 
dian development in the next 25 


“as the. "most ddvanced 


many}, ° 


years as the more _highly- 
publicised of] "strikes" in Alberta 
and the huge iron deposits 1h 


Labrador. 
"- Strict secrecy.” 


- Six. years of research at 
Chalk River, Ontarlo, have 
given Canada ‘a running atart 
In the peace-time atomic fleld, 
-and now ahe Is planning large: 
scalo expansion of atomic re- 
-scarch and -development. - .--- 
‘On the drawing boards: are 
plans:for a third atomic reactor 
to supplement the two now in 
opcration at Chalk River, the 
larger of which was described by 
an American sclentist last yeni 
in- the 
world. . ; : 
addition, a hand-picked 
team of young scfentlsts has been 
formed and told to concentrate on 
pure research probing into the 
future for possible new avplicn- 
tlons of the atomic principle. 
They are the “boys behind the 
back-room boys." i 


Taxa youa Pic! we 


Take -Your Pen! SP . 
¢. 


MANDRAKE THE 


JOHN 


January, for: spying,.and Herman! -: 


Fiel 


led Ton", prvi 3.0f, 
Pp a. egplonag 


6508 —- 


B GOT ..Twi 
IVE SHARE: 
TH iT. WITH A: 


NY. HAZARD. |‘ 


MAGICIAN . 
AS MANDRAKE PUTS THE PIN WITH THE 


MESSAGE ENGRAVED ON ITS HEAD 
UNDER THE MICROSCOPE «0+ 


Burmese rice 


_|_@xports lower. 


' 
March Qt, 
‘totalled 2,832,000,000 pounds 
during 1949, according to the’ 
_U.8. Department of Agrioul- 
“ture. | : 93,000,000 
pounds less 1948 exports, - 
Tho 1936-40 average yearly 
exports) wer 10,000,000, 
pounds io 


fey ‘ 
. Japan recelved 122,000,000 
Pounds of the 1949 shipments. 
Other ehipments were Malaya’ 
326,000,000 Ibe,’ Indonesia. 
296,000,000 Ibs, 
000,000 Ibs., Hong Kong 38,- 
000,000 Ibs., China 85,000,000 
tbs., and Ceylon 594,000,000 
- Aber Ausvolated' Frente 
a Ne, 
i te te ae 
All this is going ahead behind 
a curtain of secrecy which neither 
the scientists nor, the Canndian 
Government like. Time and: time 
again, top Chalk River sclentists 
have sald; “We have nothing to 
hide,” A 


But the full story ™cannot, be 
told, because the. United States, 
which has formal atomic alreo~ 
ments with Canada, hos decreed 
secrecy, Late Jast year. Wash- 
ington vetoed a Canadian plnn 
to allow newsmen to visit Chall 
River.—Reuter, 


India 837,- ~ 


private. employers,. 


‘considering wae incredses fo 


its own workers to. cpd: Ay 0 
weeks of ‘natlonok unrest: 

The increas, Which tha P 
Minister, M. Georges Bidoull 
submit to the Councll-of Mislste 
tomorrow, are unofficially: re; 
ported to cunslat of a. five pe 
cent general ralse: Ap elt: pubes 
services and natlonatlsed, dus 


had i 


tiles, a se 
" The nattonul strike ” sltuatlos 
conthiues to improve slowly todp 
with more workers trickling Ba 
. Less than: 250,000.out of a tote 
of 1,200,000 are now out in th 
steel industry, i tye ‘ 
-, About. 100,000 building” trad 
workers ‘are idle. ot a 
Puris socint; secutityy:'and ga 
workers, bukers’ hands, snunicipo 


‘{ undertakers and ceinclery, keepe 


and some dust-inen and sewerage) 

men, are also out. Se 
But brend Is stil sptentiful, o 

cemergency ..burlal”. .service.~ 

operating tnd though gos presi 

mmaulns low: electricl 

are sndequute.—Reuler. 


oie 


. GANDHI STATUE 
BLOWN DOWN |, 


Karachi, March 2i. 
High winds blew “down. th 
statue of Mahatma Gandhi. gut 
side the Parllament .-bulldingy 
here lost night. San ya. 
The: Pakistan Government. to 
night announced that it propose 
to repnir and re-crect' the ‘statu 
without delay.—Reuter.: : 
; vi 


yee Vee CE 


- | Hard to swallow- 


Wey DIOUT You TELL: b 
US TO “TAKE You , 


Re 


‘By Lee Falk and: Phil Dayis 


THIG.IB UNENDURABLE! 
“TO DRAG A LITTLIS GIRL” 


COME. GOOD FRIENDS... 


‘ MEAVEN 


1S\'A" BIT: THT FOR 
TWO—'60 "I'VE. CLEARED. - 
“i PAIGY CHEST | FOR fo 
svou,; DEAR EA 


ye pares et beerath te: horus ih A 


INTO. THE CLIFFS os: 
LMANDRAKE’S | 
FOUND US/T-.. 


INS 


fe 
sai 


= | 
(> Burrentiein 8 OWIRE 


CHINA NAVIGATION CO. 
SAILINGS TO 


“YUNNAN” ..... ++ Keelung,, Yokohama, 


Nagoya, Osoko & 
Kobe 


, LTD, 


P. 


—*HUPEH" 


Ti lnchen a Tienkin 


“FENGTIEN” ..... Yokohama, Nagoya, 


“PAKHOI” .. 
“NEWCHWANG 
| “YUNNAN” 


™ “ANHUI" 


“HUNAN” ....... 


Osnka & Kobe 
Wig: 
«+ Bangkok 
Bangkok ... 
Singapore 
seeeesss Singapore, Penang & - 
Belawan 


We A oe 


ARRIVALS FROM 
. Tientsin,. & Tsingtao 


“NEWCHWANG" so NOGOND cece essere 


"SHENGK 
“SHANSI" 


“KWELYANG” 
“HANYANG” 


+ “WUSUEH" 


ING"... Keeling 
seeeeeee Bangkok 
». Bangkok ... . 

veee Ticntsin & Tsingtao 


RIVER SERVICE 


Hongkong/Macao 
Dept. Hongkong °* 
2 pam. daily 
except Wed. 
& Sun. 


BLUE FUNNEL LINE 


m. 23rd Mar. 
1. 23rd Mar.*~ 


.m. 26th Mar. 


uo p.m. 25 Mar. 
5S-p.m. 24th Mar. 


-6 p.m. 30th Mar. 


15th Apr. 


3 pm. 16th Apr. 
* Sails from Custodian “Whartf.: 


23rd‘ Mar.. 


9 am. 26th Mar. 


26th Mar. 
26th Mar. 
26th Mar. 


27th/28th Mar. 


Macoo/Hongkong 
Arr. Hongkong 
7 am. Tues., Wed, 


Fri. & Sat. 


5 pm, Sunday 


Beheduled Sailings: to Europe via Aden & Port Said. 


“AUTOME 


“PATROCLUS" , 
“ANTILOCHUS” 


“PATROCLUS” .. 
-“ANKING” 


“ANTILOCHUS” 
“TELEMACHUS" 


“AUTOLYCUS" 


“MENTOR 


DON” ,,, Genoa, 
Liverpool, 
Glasgow 

«Havre & Liverpool 

.. Genoa, Marseilles, 
Liverpool, & 
Glasgow, can 


ARRIVALS FROM 
+ U.K, via Straits .., 
seoeee UK, & Rotterdam 
via Straits’ . 
+4. UK, vio Straits... 
+ UK, via Jeddah & 
Straits 
... U.K. via Straits 
UK. via Straits... 


NEW YORK SERVICE 


Marseilles, 
& 


oer aee 


“AGAMEMNON" ,. Arr. trom USA: 


via Manila 


26th Mar. | 
4th Apr. 


25th Apr. 


24th Mar. 


20th Mar 
30th Mar. 


2nd Apr. 


11th Apr. 
14th Apr. 


26th Mar. 


Carriers option to proceed vin other Port® to 
load & dischargo cargo. . 


AUSTRALIAN ORIENTAL LINE LTD./CHINA 
NAVIGATION CO., LTD. JOINT SERVICE 


: “TAIPING” 
“CHANGSHA™ ||” 


“SOOCHOW" 
“TAIPING” ... 
“CHANGSHA” 


SAILINGS TO 
seeeees Kure 
«Sydney & Melbourne 
' ARRIVALS FROM 
sAustralla oe ccecees 
-Australin & Manila * | 
.. Japan : 


eee 


. Thee e ee eenee 


27th Mar. | 
8th Apr. 


In Port 
In Port 
5th Apr. 


All the above subjcct to alteration without notice. 


..’ For Passage: and Freight particulars please ‘apply to-. 


BRAKC 


ae = re fay 
BL 

mens : 
DIRECT MONTHLY SAILINGS TO N 


f 
% 


a 


“STEEL VENDOR" ...... 
,. “STEEL VOYAG 


“STEEL: VENDOR” | 


“STEEL Vi 


_“STEEL WORKER" ...,,..,. 21st" Apr. 


CONNAUGHT:ROAD, CENTRAL 
Tel, $0351/8* Private Exchange. 


£5: 


H OFFIC 


Chater Rd. Cable and Wire 


D0. Connaught Rd..West, 25875, 32144, 24878 
less 


uy] 


Bldy. 27160. 


ISTHMIAN- LINE 


(Usthmian Steamship Company, New York) 


EW YORK 


VIA LOS ANGELES AND PANAMA 
“STEEL ADVOCATE" ...,...cccccecevseeeeevcee 10th May 
Tonks available for Bulk Oil. 


4. SAILINGS TO SAIGON, BANGKOK & 


DJAKARTA ( 


ER” eis secs esaes 


teasers Sallled 


OYAGER’ . Salted 


GILMAN & CO., 


Chin 


hs 


seen 


~_.." Sails for 
'HEMLAND” 


., Tel. 31146 - - 


SY 


oy 


Kobo a 
Meee eal 


BATAVIA) 


pe areee 


tae wr ene 


ARRIVALS. FROM U.S.A. ‘ 
SallsN.Y. Sails S.F. Due LK. 
Salled 
8th Apr. 27th Apr. 
Sth May 28th May 


3rd Apr, 
-28th Apr. 


‘2nd Apr. 


LTD. 


Freight: Agenta:—HIN FAT & CO, 
ctv. Tele: 28623, 25553 & 23483. 


LTD.’ 


“for 


sing costs, 


| DEBAT 


IN L 


: (Continued From Page 1) Fi 
_DR. S. N. CHAU 


The ‘high cost of 
Government 
ite a Sg ee 

Dr, Chau referred to the record 
expenditure, which he called 

Hiss De Sum 0 pan 0 
cent of the total wos for Govern- 
nfént salaries and allowances. 

He questioncd the wisdom of 

the suggested form. of inerease in 
direct taxation. It was farcical 
and grossly inequitable that, « 
small number of salaried resl- 
‘dents be required to pay a direct 
fax from which the remaining 
90% per cent was Jn practice en- 
tirely exempt. 
-“Public indigation has undoub- 
tedly been aroused by the reve- 
lation of this unreasonable impo- 
alttot. on the few, while tens of 
thousonds of wealthier citizens— 
a large proportion.of whom have 
come here from disturbed China 
to enjoy the security and amenl- 
ties ‘which this Colony provides— 
make no direct contribution to- 
wards the cost of the administra- 
tlon and services which censure 
that security and provide those 
amenities," ; : 

If Government considered an 

orthodox income tax, with equl- 
table taxation of all personal in- 
come,.not possible,.he would urge 
the total abolition of the present 
salarics tax. , 
’ The small Joss of revenue in- 
volved could be made good by a 
trifling all-round Increase in in- 
direct taxation—by raising the 
duties on liquor and tobacco, by 
a further levy upon the Enter- 
talnments, Dance Halls, Meals, 
Petrol, Bets and Sweeps Taxes. 


He suggested consideration of 

a Purchase Tax, with exemp- 

tlon for necessities. Those who 

could afford pleasures and 

luxuries could .also afford his 

suggeated§ slight Increase in 
. taxation, 


Most unreasonable 


He failed to see why the Cor- 
poration Profits Tax and Proper- 
ty Tax should be increased. It 
seemed to him most unreasona- 
ble, The unexpected addition of 
50 per cent In taxation at this 
time of political ahd commercial 
uncertainty might have far-rea- 
ching effects on the Colony’s 
economy, 

Dr. Chau also suggested a re- 
gistration fec of $5 under the Re- 
istration of Persons Ordinance. 
This, he estimated, might contri- 
bute $7,500,000. This form of im- 
post would not be so inequitable 
as the Salaries Tax. 

The speaker praised the impro- 
vements in education and Incdical 
facilities but. stressed that the 
Mental Hospital was a‘ disgrace 
to the Colony... The organisation 
the ..Mental Hospital 
needed overhauling, he sald, and 
he suggested a commlagion to en- 
quire into its functions. 

Dr. Chau mentioned the deplo- 
rable condition of the prisons and 
again suggested that an enquiry 
bo made. 

The acute housing shortage was 
taxing the ingenulty of Govern- 
ment. The Hong Kong Model 
Housing Society was bulldlng 400 
flats ta -be Iet at a non-profit 
making rental to those in the 
low-carning bracket.” .This was 
only a starting point .and we 
noeded a 100 times this number. 
Greater__encouragement..and -in- 
ducement should be given those 
who. wish to bulld their own 


homes. 
He sald that while Government 
had been spending miltlons in 


-housing~-for—its-—European-em=| 


ployees, the Chinese Civil Ser- 
vants had received scant atten- 
tion. ‘It was time ' Government 
gave them some consideration. 


Price of rice 


He would like to ace en- 
couragement given to the New 
Territories farmers to Increase 
thelr output of rice and voget- 
ables. The Colony's = moat 
urgent problem was Ita rice 
supply. All: our labour trou. 
blea wero basically attributable 
to the grossly exorbitant cost of 
rice, : 

It was extremely urgent to cut 
to. an absolute minimum = the 
difference between the costs and 
the retall price pald by the con- 
sumer. The solution might Uc 
in permitting the «pre-war rice 


firms to resume the import af rice} ' 


and to sell it at Governshent- 
controlled prices based’ on land- 


If the price of rice could be 
substantlally reduced, the land- 
lord should be compelled to re- 
duce ‘his rents; the farmer, the 
Price of his vegtables; the. fisher- 
man, the price of his fish; , the 
shopkeeper, the price of hik 
‘wares, <i ae Eee ee 

Effective. . control over retall 
rice prices was the Colony’s most 
urgnt and important problem. '- 
Dr. Chau mentioned the cost of 
defence, We were a very small 
part ‘of the Imperial Defence 
‘scheme, he sald, and our’ burdent 
should «not ‘be heavier: than ‘we 

er concluded ‘by: sup> 
Los. Fee 


ath 


Ta 
wala son? 
lon tuctdrioe 


. PF HOTAL ‘ps3 
THE CHINA ' 
ras 


Fee, which would bring in’ 96, 
500,000 a Sot eae ae ae 

Sup; hls case for such an 
imposition,’ Mr. d’Almada said it 
‘was mt fal that only a very 
small number of business firms 
should be. paying tax. It was a 
_burden_which should bo equitably 
distributed. . 

“I've advocated 


such an \m- 
and ox recently as last year I put 
it again in this Councell,” said Mr, 
d’Almada, ; , 

According to figures obtaine< 
from the Inland Revenuc Deport. 
mat, sald Mr. d’Almada, the 
number of business firms -in th 
Colony ts 21,000, Of these 0,00C 
have already been exempted from 
dircet taxation, At the date of the 
last report 8,000 were to be 
nasessed, nnd according to what 
he was told, the majority of these 
might be exempt from profits tax, 

Mr. d’Almada eald we could 
therefore eafely assume that 

12,000 buslnees firms will not 

te paying tax at all, 

“There is-no reason why every 
business In thls Colony should not 
make-n small contribution by way 
of a direct tax, and my suggestion 
in that that small . contribution 
should be in the form of a regis- 
tratlon fee of $300 a year which, 
broken up, would not amount tr 
more than 83 cents a day," said 
Mr. d’Almada, : 

"If we have 21,000 business 
firms here, and if we add to that 
number some 1,000 corporations, 
you. will have 22,000 separate en- 
titles Hable to be registered, ons 
If you collect $300 a year from 
each of them, then you have o 
straight-forward $6,500,000 a year, 


Scheme’s advantage 


“That ls not $7,500,000 which 
my friend the Financlal Secretpre 
requires, but he can spread the 
burden out, and collect half a mil- 
lion here. and half a million there, 
as he sald, indirect taxation: 

“The advantage of my scheme 
Is that the burden would be more 
equitably spread out, and at the 
same time it will leave the wage 
earner entirely unaffected. It will 
exclude the salary man from fur- 
ther income tax, ' 

“Then *there is its simplicity 
which will not Involve much in 
the cost of collection and adreinis- 
tration, 

“It will also be of direct assist- 
ance to the Inland Revenue De- 
partment, as compulsory registra- 
tlon must contribute to less tax 
evasion, ° 

“There Is also tho benefit to the 
business community from regis- 
tration of busin firms, with the 
names and aliases of their part- 
ners, Not infrequently, when a 
firm closes down at present, it 
simply vanishes and there 1s -no 
trace. of its partners, ~ 

“Tam not convinced of the need 
‘of further taxation, but if further 
revenue must be raised, an in- 
crease of income tax ts certainly 
aot the way to raise it.” : 


Encouragoment of 
corruption 


As a result of Government's 
proposal, justifiable dissatisfaction 
had been aroused by its inequli- 
able Incidence. ; 

Another argument against an 
increase of income tax was thet 
Government servants would als» 
-bo_affected, _ and_with .so_oiuch 
Rrumbling already on about In- 
adequacy of cost of living allow- 
ances, further tax imposition 
would only: lead to further de- 
mands for increase in pey or al- 

“lowanees— ee 

Furthermore, there would be + 
greater incentive to tax ovasion. 
The tomptation to evade was less 
only when the standard: rate wa: 
Peri seueapetee at taight 

“In your specch a for! age, 
Str,” continued Mr.’ d’Almada, 
you expressed the opinion that 
thé proposed Income tax increase 
would not damage the: economic 
structure of this Colony. I agree, 
but will the Colony's moral fibro 
stand the strain of an extra ‘60 
per cent? py ees re 

“Corruption there ls in many 
Government departments. ¢. for 
one will not bellave that It does 
not exist entirely In the Inland 
‘Revenue Department. it may 
bo but a very low proportion by 
teaton: of the present etandard 

‘rate, but give it an increase, 
and -you .witl find -that cor 
ruption will start. flourishing 
again ae it flourlshes In other 
Government departments.” 


Payment for 
requisitioning | 


* Eaclter in his. remarks Mr, 
@Almada assoctated himself with 
the Plone mhearr .by earlier 
speakers on. 
requisitionings, 1 
_ “In May, June and July lost 
year, when these’ requisitionin 


began, I had a: little to do with i 


them, and I-well remember that fn 
the course of dehling with them, 
oMcergs representing. the .: 


ope it 


»| Mutual-- advantage.’ This was ‘ot| th 


REED ate 
MAIL, THURSDAY, MARCH 23, "1980." 


4 bought in Hong Kong was 


“{n payment for" - 


ut 
at 


ote ge 


y ao 4 a . 


\ Fey S- 


Z ae : : 
arid in -certain cases . of | ware- 
iy 


houses: and godownd.'. ** : 
+ White in the case of reqilsition 
of dwelling houses only, no pay- 
ment has, been “received, in’ the 
case of factorittand warchouscs 
business has..hi to. be demo- 
billied” or htSpped,  resull[ng “fa 
serjous loss té‘tiie owners,” 
Government, .for,_its dilatorincar 
{n regard to recluination plans for 
the Star Ferry :Plers, It shoutd 
have been abundontly clear to 
Government long before now that 
the present ‘facilities were. {n+ 
adequate, but. despite thin nothing 
was done to ke provision fur 
an adequate ‘ t¥vss-harbour ser. 
vice," cist} 

Tt was not until two weeks ago 
that the Financial Secretary told 
Council that the matter of pro- 
viding a-new service was tled up 
with certain problems of re-~ 
elamation which' presented certain 
technical diMecultics which bad 
not yet been solved, ee 
“~~ These difficulties, submitted Mr. 
@'Almoda, should have been 
obvious to Government long ago, 
and those in ,charge of plera 
should have made plans to over- 
come them, so that the work uf 
reclamation could now go ahead. 

Mr. d'Almada also criticized 
the way the budget was presented 
Many of the publfe did not unders 
stand it, he said, and referred to 
the speech of Mr. T, A. Martin at 
the meeting of the Reform Club 
on Tuesday in ‘breaking up the 
figures for better public digestion. 
He suggested .that in future 
Government should try to present 
the budget in a form that woula 
be more casily understood by the 
man-in-the-street, 


MR. M. 'M. WATSON 


Acceptance of tax 
increase 


. Mr. M. M. Watson referred to 


. the outstanding item: of expendi- 


ture—the cost of Government. He 
sald that retirement at the age of 


45 on pension ‘could not be sup-]. 


ported by business firms. Heo 
could not believe it could be 
economically supported by the 
public service or by the public, It 
secmed to him an unwise and, to 
the public, unfalr regulation. 

Mr. Watson ‘asked whether: in- 
erensed taxhtlon was necessary. 
He agreed that the budget should 
now be balanced, and agreed on‘ 
the necessity’ for building up 
adequate reserves, The proposed 
increase’ in direct taxation, how. 
ever, had. - caused him much 
thought and indeclslon., 

“It is apparent that this tax’ Js 
about the. most incquitable from 
the point ofsview.:of the num. 
bers: who evade it, not from the 
point of view. of ability to pay, it 
would be possible to devise, ‘The 
belated and) scanty. statement of 
the Commissioner will not alter 
the general opinion that the eva- 
sion is beyond ‘what the ordinary 
taxpaying taxpayer considers fair 
and reasonable.” . 

From this pdint of view, Gov- 
ernment's decision should not be 


paccepted but he had reluctantly 


concluded that from a practical 
point of view at present, ‘thoro 
Was nothing else to do but accopt 
the declsion."Tho budget had to 
be balanced, He’ favoured a: tax 
on the registration of business but 


Aoubdted.whettior....tho--.amount 


nalsed would be ‘suMicent. Such: a 
tax would not increase the -cost 
of living. It was. imperative that 
nothing be done to 
ereasc the latter, : 

-The-Importance ~-of--somo-r ars! 
rangement in regard to the denlaf 
claims: had been: accentuated by 
the most Inequitable refusal or 
failure to arrange. for the = 
ment. of the rent of requisitioned 
premises, ... ; ‘ 

One of his. principal reasons 
for supporting the Increase of Ine 
come Tax was that it would not, 
or at the most, would be the Icast 
to affect the cost of living, Oo 

_Rice monopoly 

The cost -of ving was Jargely 
based on the ability of. the labour 
and clerical sections ‘to buy rice’ 
There was i'‘Government mono- 
poly. in the fatter, This,he said, 
was now not’ only unnecessary 
but against .the interests of the 
purchasing: ‘public. He referred ‘to 
complaints of the inferior quality 
of rationed -rice and . gaid : that 
even coolles found it necessary to 
resort to the free market to sup- 
plement their ration. | Approxl= 
mately 465 ptr’ cent of tho rice 
bought 


further In- 


on the free: market, - By 


aot - e060, why rice 

merchants shoyld not be allow- 

ed to Import “Siamese rice at 

. thelr own. risk and expense for 

le on thé froo' market. A free 

. Market wobld”’ bring a compe 

ititive «price, ‘tor the <elce! freo 
; Iimportatio: 


“It was aSmattcr of urgency,. he 
said, ‘to take :steps to reduce the 


Army|cost.: The matter. was: of funda~ 
referred to} 


nee ortinee. - 
‘My, Watson... nex 
the Landlord? nd Tenant Ore 


COU 


_BUDGET 


50) 


any such arrun, int ehould ox- 
tend beyond eet iinalord 
‘and” ‘tenant’ pliffies to! that con- 
tract ‘as’ that ¢ would }'probably 
bring. complications,.. prevarica- 
tlon# and collusion, It was noto- 
rious" that’* such arrangements 
were made overy day in’ defanco 
“of tho: Ordinancg.——, 

Mr.. Watson concluded with a 


which, -he sald, did no 

have advanced from Sts embryo- 
nic stage, He trusted that Gov- 
ernment would do everything to 
forward the matter, - 


‘MR. P.: S, CASSIDY. 


Strong protest. against 
Government attitude 


* Mr,.P.8, Cassidy spoke of what 

ho termed the ominous refer~ 
ence to the undetermined’ Habl- 
lity regarding the Colony's share 
of the cost of reinforcements. .. 

He entered a. strong protest at 
the treatment meted out.to. per- 
sons and companies whose clalms 
for compensation in respect of 
war-time requisitioning had been 
undor: ‘consideration for over 
three years, and property owners 
whose premises were requisi- 
toned Jost summer and who were 
stil) waiting for payment of rent, 

The ‘Telephone Company's 
building in Kowloon was requi- 
altioned last October and not onc 
cent of rent had’ been received, 
nor was it. known how | much 
would be ‘paid. 

The building was financed by 
money borrowed from the bank 
at a rate of five per cent a ‘year. 
The regulations under which the 
building was requisitioned allow- 
ed no. more than two per cent in- 
terest on overdue payments. The 
company therefore was in the 
unenviable position of owing a 
targe sum to its bankers at what 
virtually amounted to compound 
{nterest pending the tlme when 
payment would be forthcoming 
wit simple interest at two per 
een 


“This le a glaring caso of In- 
justice and there aro many 
other cases, such as the North 
Polnt Wharves, . although of 
lessor. magnitude. Considerable 
hardship ts belng: experienced 

* in many quarters and it Is 
utterly wrong that the Home 
Government should = procras+ 
tinate tn acttling the clalms.”, 


. He hoped the strong feeling In 
Hong Kong on the subject would 
be made clear in London. That 
feeling might result in 0 motion 
af censure, 


No excuse 


“There can be no excuse for 
owners to. g0 on month after 


month without. recompense, Many |-, 


of them. find ‘thomselvdt in: an 
embarrassing situation and I beg 
the Financial Secretary to make 
every: effort to obtain a speady 
settlement.” es 

They appreciated that Hong 
Kong was a bastion of the non- 
Communist «front, | While they 
had no wish to evade their share 
they should certainly not.be ex- 


pected to shoulder the full cost}. 


of maintaining that bastion. 
Turning to the Budget, .Mr. 
Cassidy said that a comparatively 
trifing $7,000,000 on the wrong 
alde did not justify resort to an 
increase In taxation, We were 
not a bankrupt Colony; we had 
“behind~us~ a clean” financial” re> 
cord and we had: assets which 
were not likely to bo dissipated 
by a sudden change in our for- 
tunes. ‘ ea 
There_wds..considerable feeling, 
that the standard rate of tax un~ 
‘der the Inland Revenue Ordin- 
ance should havo‘ been‘ left alone. 
The main-reason. for . criticism 
was the conviction .that Inland 
Revenue taxes were not equit- 
ably,., economically “and incor- 
ruptedly collected. When methods 
of accounting ‘differed as widely 
ag ‘they did in the Colony, there 
‘should be no question of raising: 
tho ‘standard rate. ‘Tho original 
ordinance was reluctantly, accept 
ed.'as a measure-. to .meet , an 
emergency; it was never Intended 


as a tap to ‘bo'opencd wider, gs] 


expenditure arose, . nN 
asked what . alternative 
there was to the suggested ‘in- 
crease, They wdre_prepired: to 
pay moro ‘for drinks, ‘ cigarcttes. 
and petrol and would be over- 
joyed at;a,really substantial tax 
on: what he called “those: Inflated 
Umousines which overlap ‘every\ 
“parking spaco.in the, Colony and 
take up an inordinate amount of 
room in our streets” °°! 
He’ welcomed’ the. taxon’ clec- 
trie signa and ‘thought ‘It would 
bring in more .than $250,000. It 
would be feasible to-impose a tax 
on hoardings, painted’ wall signs 
and other forms of '. advertise» 

ment, 1 ON eye 
again appealed for 


Mr. Cassidy 
better’ treatment of 
‘Relations « Office. -: The. spoken 
and. written’ word. was: of vital 
importance © the” ‘cold § war. 
Propaganda. © required ', .. skilful 
handling. and wo should”seo that’ 
the PRO: recoived all:.the support 
he nedder rate ne 


‘dinance,. and ‘eald~ that! it should: 


‘be-made possible for.the landlord | - 


and .tenant’t0'tome' to: an. 
ment, - when‘: it: was to thelr 


,.| present prohibited....by ‘the; 


whheo: 
‘pequisiion 
tively lig, 


din: 


Hoitid ‘not’ suggest that}: 


og nntig z Lecnccacy | Wo Teh 
Rac af 


Terry, the 
ths. Unoiictals, was: 


posed «.{ : 
hear but 


7 
not scem to!: 


¢ ‘Public | - 


CIN 


“ 
N 
N 


[= 


PENINSULAR & ORIENTAL 5:4; -CO, 
: PASGENGER/FREIGHT SERVICE . 
OUTWARDS ‘LEAVES LONDON DUE RONGKONG 
ws “CARTHAGE”? Balled 10th April 
* gee. “CORFUN Gth April fth May 
o2, “CANTON” ath May . &th Jone , 
Via Bouthampton, Port Seld, Aden, Rombay, Colombo, Penang &- 
Bingapore. 
LEAVES HONGKONG 
1dth Apri} 
ith May 
_ th Juss 
“1h July ° 


re 


> 


‘DUB LONDON 
1th May 
itth Jane 
10th July 
6th August 


HOMEWARDS 
os, “CARTHAUE’ 
ea, “CORFU” 
am “CANTON” 
om “CARTHAGE” 
os “CORFUY ith August Sih Beptember 
on. “CANTON” Int Replomber And October , 
Accepting Carga for filnuapore, Peoang, Colambo, Bombay, Aden, 
Porta Bald & London, y ‘ 
“FREIGHT GERVICE 
DUE TONGKONG 
16th April 
Mth May 
LEAVERS HONG KONG FOR . 
22nd April Kebo & Yokohama. 
- HOMEWARDS ‘LOADS HONGKONG FOR : . 
ms, “KOCOTRA” Uth April London & Continent. -. 
os. “BIBLLONG" lth May —ae 


» Aceepting Cargo for Singapore, Port Swettenham, Penang. Colom 
bo, Aden, Port Aald, Genoe, Marselites, London, Hamburg, Ant 
werp & Lotterdam, With liberty to esl] at Dombey If inducement 
offers, “ 


TANKS AVAILADLE FOR CARRIAGE OF OIL IN BULK. 
SPACE FOR REFRIGERATED CARGO. LIMITED PASSEN- 
GER ACCOMMODATION, 


BRITISH INDIA S.N. CO., LTD. 
es, “SIIRALA™ | 
mu, “BANGOLA” ' 


rLidadirdctide tL 


4 


FRom ” 
+ London & Continent. 


ouTwaane 
‘oh “SHILLONG" , 
me, “BOUDAN” 


KK 
CEES 


ee, “SHILLONG" 


ar 


Caecum, 
LISI A 


Coddicthendndie 
Pos 


Cas 


x Inport 


wails 23rd Mar. 
due 2th Mar. 


for Calcutta vie Atralts, 
from Calcutta, & Many 
woon via Stralta, 
for Japan, 

from Japan, 

for Btralls, Danguon & 
Calcutta, ; 


© Three shina have Refrigerated Cargo space. .” 


_'P. & 0./B.1. JOINT SERVICE: 


mo, “PEMDA” 


nk 


‘valle 2th Mar, 
de 30th Apr, 


ae. “TAIRRA” 
; antle Siu Apr. 


from Bombay, 

for Japan, 

from Perelan Gulf, B 
: bey & Btraite, 
sails End Mar, for Japan, 


i es x 
© Accepts cargo on through Dilla of Ladin g for Persian Gulf Ports 


EASTERN & AUSTRALIAN S.S. CO., ‘LTD. - 


as, “NELLORE” © =~ loads Dth Apr, ‘Manila, Rabaul, - 
as ¥ . * Brlabane, Sydosy, « Mel- 
bourne, Adelaide, Wel 
lington, Auckland, Lyt- 
telton & Dunedin. Calls 
Port Moresby {f aufficlent 
inducement, ‘ 


| Island ports on through 


due 27th Mar, 
salls Slat Mar: 
me “OZARDA” ;, due End Mar, 


Fe nto 


for 


# Aceepta cargo for Now Zealand & Paci ¢ 
"Ute of fading, rr) 
Ail: vensela have liberty to eait at any, ports on: or off the route, 
“abd the routes and ‘sallings aré‘aubject to change, oF ‘dmendment' . 
with or without notlee, . * : ; 


“For Full porliculurs apply loi . 
MACKINNON, MACKENZIE & CO. 
"Telephone Nos:27721-4... | 


2°" Cnlatteteade 


“US. ORIENT MERCHANT 


ae i. ce 


LINE. 


—— 


our 


el 


——sHIP= > 


- 


8. “ANNITGA” 


" 


EAST COAST/US.A. . vr goth: Mar, 
es. “VASSILIS" Stow Oth Apr. 
' W.R. LOXLEY-& .CO., (CHINA). LTD. 


‘ 5 hie AGENTS. - ° eels on 
Mork: Building. © ~. -. gaat ; Mel. 34165 
"It will mect the convenichce of 
béth Unofficial and Official mem= 
bers Ifthe. Debate la. pdjourn- 
ed, Many important. poirits have 
been calsed and some of them will 
roquire time for their proper c>a- 
sideration. 6 

“It would also be convenient ie 
the. Appropriation Bill and the =. * 
Draft ‘Estimates of: Revenue and’ «3 
Expenditure . for 1950/51 «could | +; 
now bo-referred to a ‘select com- 
‘mittee’ to consider in, detall any .: 
final adjustment ate Je pees : 
come necessary since the 
‘print ‘estimates were’ framed, , 
Tho select committee. will consist 


derived its income from merchant 
business, should be taken Inta 
account, “ 


"It at the end ‘of the year, this 
deficit {s found to be a reality, 
then ‘the balance :in .the Depart: 
ment can be utilised towa: Its 

set-off," sald: Mr. ‘Terry... 
- He supported the proposal: of 
Mr. d’Almada’ for a tax on busl- 

ness firms, . °° ee 
The high .cost of Government 
was criticised’.by -Mr.-Terry, as 
also the ‘unreality of the cost of 
living allowances which ‘ho | felt 
shoula bo adjusted’ with: salary, 
‘to prevent the present: Inflation- 
sp Tae ate : 

: ‘people in the. Colony on 
Pe erotext would.” ralse |. 

thelr pricds, © without ‘any~ reol 
justification, :. such -as tho -price 

et Inunediately,.after the de- 


. Govern: te reply. so the, dem : 
stop’ 1Il be mado next. nes~. 
should.take sirong:action: to stop'| batg will be mado mM ‘ 
this exploitation of the publics ed March’ 20... ee 

’ Progress of-:v: le, produc- : 

Pra rhe Now terest les “wos 

favourably ’ comniented” upon’: by]: 

My, Terty <who urged .-that ‘every 

encouragoment:. should: be: given]. 

to. the’ farmers,’ ‘and that,, the]: 

threat ‘o and: vice]: 


2 
rn 
.@ 
--_ 
> 
wi 


96a Ad ME AP 


PEAT & 


LET 


é SINGAPORE, SIVA 
PORTS and Mile san te 
J MACASSAR-..-_. .. ARRIVALS SAILINGS 


SNe TPBORT 


6th Apr. 


16th Apr. 


PPPeTETT TT 


“THTIALENGKA® 


@ MANILA, EAST & 
OUTH AFRICA &. 
OUTH AMERICA 


’ 2dth Mar. 
18th Apr. - 


, “BOISBEVAIN" . 
“BTRAAT SOENDA” 
"BTRAAT MALAKKA" 
“TEGELDERG" 


10th A pre 


4th. May 
tet June 


* 49th: May 


JAPAN | 
“BERLAGE” — .. 
“BOIBBEVAIN” —.ccsoevase | 
"BTRAAT- GOENDA" ,...03. 17th Apt. 
“STRAAT MALAKKA” 

"TEGELBERG” ” 48th May 


Agents: , HOLLAND—EAST ASIA LINE 


© EUROPE via MANILA 
and MALAYA 


: “HOOGKERK” 
“MEERKERK” 
“RYNKERK" 


27th Mar. 
26th’ Mar. 


Oth Apr. 
Pi ried oo 


ARRIVALS SAILINGS 


2nd April 
2nd May 
early June 


“40th April 
early May 


Through Bs/t Issued’ to 
Mediterranean and Northern 
European porte, 


‘JAPAN 
“HOOGKERK" 


. “MEERKERK"” 
"RYNKERK”  ...,. 


tat April 
fat May 


77th April 
Early June 


early May 


LIKING : ut, INE. Vhet ig OAL: Seo MG TO 2ROVT 


| BARBER. NILHELNSEN “LINE 


“ FERNSTREAM ” 
LOADING 2nd APRIL 


M.Y. 


MW. a TALLEYRAND. “ 


_ LOADING. 17th APRIL: 
.. FOR. 
PiciFic AND ATLANTIC COASTS 


- Via Japan. 


Transhipment’ cargo, accepted for 
South en and West Indies Ports. 


Agents nace 


DODWELL & CO, LTD. 


Telophones: 28621/6° 


Pa 


De La RAMA LINES: 


Sailirig. to. Now York, Baltimore, Pritadstphia, 
Vio Japan dhd Pécific coast -ports 


MY. “AGAMEMNON” cecereeecces 230d Apr. 


is ‘Arriving via Manila ‘from, 
U.S. ATLANTIC & i Manila ‘COAST PORTS 


MS, “DONA NATIN csp ees lid 26th ‘Mar. | 


cess eeeeve e's due 15 Apr. 
Ara dud ed Mey 


N.Y. “BENGAL”: . 
NS. “DONA “ANIC 


re ete ay 


: ‘BUTTERFIELD & swine 


a, en a, sita1/e 


i, Gotiatight Rd 


er ES ERP PLANS 


Hong Kong | * 
~~ Stock. 
Exchange 


A featurcless_morning. 
ILK. GOVT, LOANS 
4¢> Logon 99n. : 
Balt Loun’ (1994 & 1940) O8b, | 
SMe Loan (EUR) 000, 
DANKB: 
TILK, & Bo Mank’ t416b, 14500, 14b0e2, 
” (Len, Rew.) £8tn. 
Chartered Hank 49 6/i6n, 3 
Mereantiia Dank A. & DU, £22%en, 
Bank of East, Anta 108b, 
INBURANCES 
Canton Ins, Aton, 
Union Ina, a10n, 
Chinn Underwrlicra &n, 
WOK. Fire Inn, Youdly, 2180, 
SIMPPING 
Dougtdaca 200n. 
WK, & M. Bteamboats | Yn. 
Indo Chinaa (Vref) sein, 
” (Def) £000, 
Bhelte (Bearer) 63/0n. 
Union Waterbuala 264, 
Aaln Nov, .00b, 
DOCKS, WITARVER, GODOWNA, Rte. 
MLK, @ K. Wharves Ex.Div, o3n. 
North Pulnt’ Wharvea 6.60b, 
Shenghal Hongkow Wharvew Men, 
ILK. Ducks 18 %40, 
China Providents .11.00b, 
Hhanghal Doekyarda 4, 4.06aa, 
Whevlockn 2744s, 
MINING 
Itnub Minvw G44n, 
ILK, Mines 0140, 
LANDS, ROTELS & NLDOA, 
MW, & 8, Motel 0.26, 
VK. Landa d6an, 
hal Lands Ign. 


» Fataten 180n, 
PUBLIC UTILITIES 
IK, Tramwayn Ea.Diy. 13%b, 
Peak Trama (Old) 180. 
(New) Oho, 


tu (Olly 11,708, 
(New) 8.00b, 99, | 
. Electrica 26%4b, 274m, Pea, 
Macao Electeles 200, 
Bandakan Lixhta Min, 
Telephones 16tyen, 
Bhanuhal Gan Ttin. 
+ INDUBTRIALS 
Child, Mneg. (Ord.) 2642 n. 
Canton Teco 444n. 
Cements Ex.Mehts 114%, 
ILK, Ropes Ex.Diy, Ten, 
STORES, Fle, 
Dairy Farms 4044 
Wataons Ex.Div., 
L, Crawfords 21% 
.. Binceren 3.80n, .. 
China Emyporlum oun. 
Hun Co, Ltd, 2b, 
Kwong Bang Honk vob, 
Wine On (HK) 62b, 
Wm, Vowell, Lid. Yen. 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Chinn Entertuinments 1T4a, 
HK, Constructions (Olt) 2.40n. 
By * (New) 1.30n, 
Vibro "Pultngs ls. : 
Maramun Investments O/on, 
Marsmon (FLK.) .70n, 
Shanwhal Loan 1.300. 
Yongtarce 3%, 
COTTONS 
Ewon 3.106, 3,30n, Shien, 
RUBBER, ete. COMPANIES 
Alma Eatates 1fd. 
Angie Dulell. 30n.. 


42 he, 


é Senate Foruign Relations Corhmittee today 
voted unariimous éppréval of the "Adiniiniatee: 
‘tioi’s fall: $3,100 ‘silllian Rurepean Recovery 


Programme. 


The House of Representatives has: soled to cut 
$1,000 million.of chsh from the fund but to 


provide an equivalent Value’ ‘in American a 


. Ggricultural surpluses fot European FECBYE DY, 


The Senate Committee also 
approved $100 million in econo- 
mic’ ald for Korea and suggest- 
ed a possible $50 million in 
aid for the Chinese Natlonailst 
Governnicnt.- 

The: Committee's decision was 
announced. . by the Chairman, 
Senator Tom Connally. 

There will probably. be oO 
Senate-House dispute before the 
ECA figure {gs finally approved by 
Congress because of the different 

opinions held by the Senate and 
i couse Committees, 

But Sehator Connally thinks 
that Congregs will eventually re- 
fect the House Committee propu- 
sala to substitute surplus farin 
products for $1,000 million cash. 

The House Forelgn Affairs 
Committde . today approved 0 
statement favouring coltadoration’ 
by the free peoples of Asin for 
self-help and mutual co-optra- 
tlon to protect thelr security. and 
Independence, 

The policy statement was ap~ 
proved aa part of the Foreign Ald 
Bil for the 12, months beginning 
July 1, The Committee is near 


‘)the end of Its work on the mca- 


sure, which contemplates continu- 
ed American economic ald to 
felendly nations In Europe and, 
sia, 


For e¢onomic purposes 


ite Chairman, Mr. John Kee, 
sald that the’ ‘Committee con. 
templated only economic co- 
opération, not military, with 
the natlons of Aula. 
’ The House of ‘Representatives 
Forelgh Affairs Committee today 
authorised another year's exten- 
sion of the authdrity to use about 
3104 million of the China Aid 
funds previously. earmarked bul 
50 far unspent. 

“With the Chinese - Communists 
controlling almost: all of China it 
Is thought in Washington that 
these funds would be available In 
other areas of Sbutti East Asta, 


such as_ Indo-China. 
~ 4°" The Committee’ also incrensed |: 
‘} from $180 million to $300 million 


the amount’ of ECA guaranicen} 
provided for the private invest~| 
ment of United States eapital 


abroad.—Reuter. 


JAPAN TRYING . 
TO CUT COSTS: 


London, March ai. 
Japanese indust! atrondy’ 


| providing strong cornpetition to’ 


British cotton godds, is trying 


Anglo-Javas In. 
Batu Aname .20n. 
Bute Vhuntatlone 4b, 
Chemor United .40b, 
Cheng Rubbers .10n, 
Consolidated Rubbers 2b. 
Domintons Rubbere 1.30b, i 
-Lanukats In. \ 
Tepnh Rubbers .16b, 
Rubber, Trasta 224b, 3%. | 
Bimagnga Rubbers .G5b, ,70sa,- 
‘Bemambu Rubbers .1Sv.. 
. Bhanghal Kedahs d\b. 
Sbanghal. -BMalaye 10n, 
Bhaughal Pahang .$6b, 
Bhanghal, Bumatrad Con, 
1 
| 
| 


Alu Durts 16b. 

‘Tanah Meérahs 35b, .700, 
Tebohg Rubbdrs .10b. 
Blanato Rubbers 80n, 


| Money Market}. 


US dollars Yn yesferduy ' a 


|| HKS6.29) and ‘closed. at $6.328. 


TY went.up to $6.37 after: a 
ing: at $0.35, 

eacrling ‘dropped five. ccnts ‘te 
HK$15.3 hi. 

‘Australian pounds also dropped|* 


‘| Ave: cents to $13.20. 


Plastres remoined nominol “at 
1K$12.50 a °100. . 


‘| Ticals ‘at HK$28.30 a 100 were 


tinchanged. 
There {s 2 tutther “slide in NEC 


‘Gplidets whith ‘dropped ‘to * 


aise. a 100," atler becirs af 


“RUSSO-CZECH 
TRADE’ PACT 


: ‘Prague, ,; ae 
: The Geochasioval tina 


sdurces, 


_ | Hh Negottal 
| te. : 


‘to’ cut “costs” by ~starching ~ for: 
raw materials. fom cheaper: 


This point is made. in, a 
report by Air Vice-Marshal CAL 
Bouchter, who has just returned! 
‘from a three-month tour of Jupan! 
on ‘beholf of ithe Federation “oll 
British Industries. | 

The Japanese, he reported, ar 
‘making steady ond material pro- 
ee, {but prices are tending 
rise 

‘Air Vice-Marshal Bouchier 
‘to brief the British cotton .. in 
dustry on coriditions. in Japan. it 
is to be réptesented on an Anglo-' 
American, Cotton Textile Mission, 
going fo Japrn’ ‘shortly. 

Britlsh ‘cottou chiefs are 
orted (6 be ‘worried by the gré 
ing a pte goes from Jepan in 
‘cotton -p' le¢e-yoods-~—Reuter, 


RIPPS. "REJECTS: 
“SUGGESTION 


"1. ‘anddn, March 21, . 
‘Sir Stafford Cripps, Chancellor 
of the ‘Exchequer,’ today ‘refused 


B ‘auagestion “that ho should ‘imit}’ 


Matimem Selling. 


‘merely scesawed 


HK AGREED 
MERCHANT -RATES| 


* Mininium’ Buying. 
Blerlings 

Yi 27/32 1/2 18/36 TT, 
1/2 a8/a2 O.D, 
1/8 80 days, 
1/3 1/12 € & 00 days. 
1/8 1/16 120 days, 


Aterling (EF & B Africa) 
1ya 27/828 1/82 OD. it under 
Ly/Crealt. 
1/8 3/22 0.D, withoat 
L/Credit. 
A/ltnd vp every 
. 30 da: 


Bterling (W Africa a W Indien): 
3/2 27/32 1/37/82 O.D, $f rider 


Credit. 
1/3 9/32 OD. what ; 
aredlt. 


T/stnd vp every: 
30 deve. 


Napeed (tidta)s 
42 7/16 83 7/10, TT, 
“RS 11/16 O.D, 
By 13/16 4a 20 20, dayd. 
32 10/18 
84 1/16 90 day 
Rapeds (Aden): 
82 7/168 G¢1/16 O.D, fC under 
L/Credit. 
84.3716 OD, without 
L/Oredit. 
* 94 11/16 20 & 60 days. 
Rupese (Rangoon) t 
ag 7/16 


Hopes (Pabletan) t 
67 1/8 


Maleya: ‘ % 
52 a/6 (21/4 TT. & OD, 
8 8/8 80 diye, 


‘63 7710 ‘60 days, os 


U.S, Dollars: 

“17 6/10 19 wa nT. a ‘on: 
17 0/16 30 days. 

\ 17 078 606 00 days, 


Canada 
19 19 1/4 TT, & OD, 


Ausirdia: . Goat 
Wee = 1/8 8/4 TT, 


1/6 13/16 O.D, 


New Zealand: 
1/2 27/82 1/3: 3/82 TT. 

. 1/3 8/32 0.0, 

NoD—Sterling acliing rates for deli; 

very within twa months with @ eut of 

iBind for the next Cliree months fore 

ward. | 


‘NY RUBBER 


New York, March 21, | 
Crude rubber number’ one 
futares closed 25 higher to three 
lower. Sales 46 con 
March was 20. i 
q 


Boptember : 18.02.65.) 
one Hbbed! 


. number 
shevts, 20-14 nominal.—| 
Assoclated Press, : ‘ | 


; ‘| 
NOTICe TO CONSIGNEES: 
ss. “GATEWAY City” 


Ba ad 


fhe Globat Fleet” 


“40 HONOLULU & SAN FRANCISCO |) 
via- JAPAN ———-——-—- oma 


é ATS 
New York, March 21. 

Buytig Interest In. a hand- 
picked group of ulllity stotks 
highlighted today's market action. 
‘Traders todk only tepid Interest 
4 mony of the -uminl leaders. 
Prico changes rar¢ly execedod -a 
point and gains and losses were 
‘pretty well mixed, Many shares 
in a fractionol 
ringe. Favoured Issues though 
‘moved up as much ug four points. 
. A moderate amount of business 
‘was done with a turnover of 

1,400,000 shares. 

Western: Union “was o popular 
Isstie with n rise of 12% at 23-44. 
American Telephone also hit a 
;new 1949-50 peak and ended % 
up at 152-%. 

Lewer in the curb were Cities 
‘Gervied and Ting Sol Lamp. 
Higher were Claude Neon, Elec» 
‘trie Bond and Share, Kirby 
Petroleim and United Light. 

Dow Jones ‘averages: Stocks 
208.27;. 20 Industrials 65,21; 15 
Raflg 49.57; 10 Utilities 74.97. . 

“Alaska Juneau 3 
. American Can 117% 

Smelting 62% 

aad Telépltione 152% 

mt Tobacoo 73% 

"| Waterworks 115¢ 
Anaconda Copper 28% i, 
Aviation Corp. 6% — 

Baldwin Locomotive 11% 

Bornsdall 50% . 

Bendix Avintion 42 

Béthichem Steel 34% 

.Botlng Aircraft 27% 

Borden C2. 51 
' Canadkan Pacific 14% 
rd. Te Cate 44 

Cneysier ao% 

Colgate 40% ‘ 

Commercial Solvent 105% 

Corn Products 70% 

Du Pont 65% 

Eastman Kodak 40% 

General Electric 46% 

"| Motors 765 

Goodrich 83% 

Goodyear 51 - 

Home: Mining 45 

International ‘Harvester 26% 

ve Paper 38% ‘ 
Ws, Tel & Tol 11% 

Johny Manville 48% ” 

Keanevott Copper 615% 
-Montgomery Ward 56% 

. National Distillers 23 

7 Dead 20 

New Cork Central ‘13 

Pickard ‘Motors 3% . 

Pan’ Amoriéan. Airways 10 . 

Pennsylvania RR 17% 

Radio Corp. 1444 

Remington Rund 14% ay 
Republic Steel 20% : 
Reynolds Tobacco 36% 
Schenley 30% 

Sears Roebuck 43% 

Shell Oil 30% 

Socony Vacuum 17 
Southern Pacific 515% 

Standard Brands 23. °° 

Oil of Calif. 055% 
Ou of N, J, 60% 

Studebaker 29%, 

Unton Bag 20% 

"_ Carbide 44 


a “Prealdent Cleveland 
“President Wilson” ” fev emeeees Arr. “May rs 


“President Johnson” 


~ BOMBAY, KARACHI, SUEZ, PORT SAID, 


| “BENATTOW" 


Arr, ‘Ape. 13. Suits Ap RY at 


Bulls may 3 


TO SAN FRANCISCO. & LOS. ANGELES 


via JAPAN 


“president Hartlaon’ vecesees Att. Apr, 4 Sails Apr: 
“President McHinloy” Arr, ‘Apr. 13 aus A 13° 


TO NEW: YORK, BALTIMORE & BOSTON 
via PACIFIC COAST & PANAMA. |. 


saseeeee ARK Apr. 15 
“President Fillmore” » Arr, ‘May iB 


‘ROUND THE WORLD 


VIA MANILA, SINGAPORE COLOMBO, COCHIN, 


ALEXANDRI 
NAPLES, MARSEILLES, GENOA, NEW YORK and DOSTO! 


“President Montoo” .........Arr Apr, &  Snalld Apr, 
“President Buchanan” ..,.... Art. ‘Agr. 16 an ae 18 


TO JAVA & STRAITS 
“President Fillmore” ,..,.., Art, Apr. 8 


St.-Georgo’s' Bldg. ‘ : % 


Soils Apre.! : j 
Sails May’ er! t 


eeaee 


Sails Apr.’ ‘0, 
Tol. 28172/5. — 


FROM 

“BENLAWERB"....1...U,K vin in 

“BENVANNOGH” ang tha tite of “iar. 
“BENATTOW” seme poe +o 7) 97th Apr, 
“BENNEVIS" .... —— . gn 20th Ape. 
“BENCRUACHAN” ; » «80th Apr. 

yvie” ee eas _ 

“BENCLEUCH" —j i dit we, 


SAILINGS ae 
eucnee . 7 
fuss Loading on dv abe, 
London, Antwerp, : as 


‘Rotterdam, Hamburg 
& Hull. 


Génca, Avonmouth, 


London, . . Rotterdam, 
Hamburg.& Hult, f 


4 ativerpopt, we 
“RARER: rere - “Dubie? sone 
BENORUACHAN” . 'L Antwerp. ard May 


Vin Maldye, ‘Gdiombo, Adon, ana Suez Gan : 


t Accepts ‘Oardo for Port ‘Oudan, 
(Accpts Cargo for Rotterdam F 
Accepts Cargo tor‘LE MAVAB. 2! 


Wor Furtter Particutira, ‘Apply To 
WR LOXLEY. & €O. (CHINA), Lt, 


agents . 
: Telophioné: 34103, | 


2tat Ape, 
16th May van 


4th Apts: 
25th Apr. 
: ek 3 M ay~ 


“BENCLEUCH” ,.,. 


+YBENVANNOCH” § 4 
}"BENNEVIB", gt 
_MAENWYVIG cin rs 


ard Apr. 


York ‘Buttaiig, 


—" US" Rubber 43 %4- 
" Steel 32 
" Lines 17 
Westinghouse 34% 
Courigstown Sheet & Tube a2 
Gén. Pub. Utilities 17% 
Ralls ond Utilities lost ground | 
fn a'slowly declining corpor 
bond market: Rafls wete 2 poin 


or more iower-—haseclated Press! g 


NOTICE TO ‘CONSIGNEES - 
CONSIGNEES ‘FR 
STATES SREAMsttP 


1a vdoHtsa” 


| 
Sage | 
“ang nk Co's. godownl 


| eae Sonor oes 


by Taw the amount of ’ Sterling] ’ 


'bilances,'both capital and interest, 
‘to-be feltasged fn'any oro’ yeur: * 


In Parllamerit, ho replicd, No” 
when f ‘asked, to, do: Bo. ie the Con- 
servative Member. Arthur 
Dodds Parker. - 

Mr. “Dodds ‘pablier Higésted|" 


‘Anat soiug. action shoufd’ bo fakes 


wtheb the ;hands'.of, Brit 
age by. such ‘a iizaltal 


6 Chanéotlor,: “epilé : 


after: ie. ‘tects. Titre: left th 
‘fie ative itten 


an 2 
woult .be quite ‘inappropria 


take: unilateral action do ‘a roattes 
. bo‘nrranged: 


gneed 
Flak ‘and dubject: to the Wharf'd 
‘| terzis and conditions ot aay ba 


[pes 
Ci ae by coe eury aad 
Messrs. Carmichael * & ‘Clarke 
‘di Match 


shaikugies ore les ne 
aga 


RY 


Pte hoe 


THE am rt 


M.S. “KVERNAAS" 
LOADING aaOUT: 30th. MARCH 


"for 
. "pen, vOut SAID; ‘GENOA, 
(3 -“ANTWERE, ROTTERDAM, HAMBURG, ost, 
|. GOTHENBURG “& COPENHAGEN, 
* Tankd available for: tho- ‘anni ‘of oll. in Bulk,” 


“PHAM - HUU- cnr 
“*RINGERD" 


SAILINGS TO - 
PASSENGER/FREIGHT | SERVICE 


‘CHAMPOLLION” *.. Marscilles vio. Manila ...,..8th. May 
ILA MARSEILLAISE” Yokohama & Kobo:........30th May 
'LA MANSEILLAISE” Marsollles via Manila .....10th Juno 


———_— 
FREIGHT SERVICE . 


eT EOGENNITOR” “ON. Aftiea'& Europe .....14th Apr. 
“STE MERE EGLISE’ N Africa -&, Europo | veeee DSH Many 


‘OR PORT, SAID, TUNIS, MARSEILLES, [NUGTERS, ORAN, 
TANGIER, CASABLANCA, ‘HAVRE, DUNKIRK, 
"AN NIWERE, & ROTTERDAM. 


— 


“pIGNEAU DE DENAINE” “y Salgon 
“RIN ERD” vee . Satgon | 


For Passage and Freight Apply tor— 


CIE DES MESSAGERIES MARITIMES 


Tel. 20651. (three Lines) 


1. 42029th Mar. 
.12th Apr. 


Queen’ 8s Bullding 


eae CoRpoRAT ON 
MOBILE, ALA., U.S.A. 


WATERMAN LINE EXPRESS FREIGHT SERVICE 


FROM U. ae atu LANTIC COAST 


SS, “WAR HAWK” sea eeeneene ..Duo about 23rd Apr. 1980. 


Direct for Now York, Baltimore & Philadelphia 
via Japan, Honolulu 
Also accepting transhipmont Cargo for Gulf Ports 
For frelght and, further particulars apply: — 


‘WALLEM - ‘& CO.fLTD. 


AGENTS. 
" Hongkong & Shanghol! Bonk Blig. Tels, 34177-9. 


Hongkong oe ae 


i—_— FAR EAST SERVICE——— 


‘ FROM U.S. ATLANTIC COAST ‘PORTS 

vy. “IGADI" .due abont 9th Apr. 1950. 

"SAILING FOR .TSINGTAO, .TAKU BAR & 

PHILIPPINES. 
mv. “IGADI” donee eeeneonaeees sails about 10th Apr. 1950. 
DIRECT FOR U.S. ATLANTIC COAST 
_ VIA PANAMA IN 35 DAYS 

MIGADY? _. ccc eeeee eee ees alls about 3rd May 1950, 


Ae ee 


For freight and further particulars apply— 


WALLEM & CO.(LTD. 


- Agents 
‘Hogkong & Shanghai Bank Bee 


THE PACIFIC ORIENT EXPRESS LINE 


From Uv. 5. Pacific Coast 


MV. ““VESTEROY” eoececeseeseeeDDue about ‘am Agr. 1950 
MY, “VINGNES” vec ce eee te -Due hbout 20th “Apr. 1950 


LOADING FOR, FUSAN, | 
For partioutare please avy ‘te 


iTels. 34177-9. 


ce & Shanghal ‘Ba ne 


BALTE oii. 
AND PA AN 


Shipping Arrivals 


YESTERDAY - 


| Mount Mansfield - AAPL) American,7523_ 
tons ex-Keelung KW 


Hunan (BD - 8) “ce-Tlentalny 


TOMORROW 
_ Renvannoch (Loxley) ex-U.K, 
Dolesevnln RIL) ex-Manila, 
: Ocean Mall = (Hveretty 
Coast, 
Patroelus (0) & 8) ¢x-U.K, 
angola (Mac Mac) x-Calcutta, 
BAT Aes nee 3 
Shipping Dopartures 
VESTERDAY 
Akron, Lily (Tlenz Sing) for Holbow. 
Glencarn (Jardine) for Singapore, 
Nol Wong (Jebshun) for Huthuw. 
Jade Leaf (Tong King) for Macao 
Ling Yuan (Shun Cheens) for Bangs 
kok, 
‘ a : ‘TODAY oe 
* Hupeh (B & B) for Inchon. 
Machaon (BE & 8) for Kohalchang, 
Mount Manafleld (APL) pound 
world. 
Bhirala (Mac, Mac) for Singapore. . 
‘Teanqucbar (FB, A.) for Atlantle Coast. 
William Gachenr AUBL) for Atlantic 
Conat. 
' TOMORROW or 


Houpatnville (tank) for Singapore. 
Mendeverctt (Evervtt) for Manila, 
+ Pakbod (8 & 8) for Nangkok, 
Vessels In Port 
A, Earhart (Mollers) 
Alvosoveky (Metro) 
Alycone (Ever) Zi 
Andreas (Loxley) 
Bust, (Larssen).'« 
Chong Tong {China 88) 
Chenrking (CMSN) 
Chee Heinz (Wallem) 
Chia» Jen {CMBN) .- 
China Transport (Jardine) 
Chi Clans (Ming Sube) 
Chunsang = (Jardine 
Gloverlock (He 
Colanin (Nolasco) 
Zoton (Colonial) 
Daviken (Lee Yu 
Dona Aurora (Bo & 
Dun Yu (C¥BN) oan 
Faatern Troder (G, Suuthern) .. 
Emplre Park (Lum Kee) ..- 
Fengtien (BD & 8)... 
Plytsu Cloud (Pattison) 
Flying Dragon (Wallem) 
Fook Wah (Holly) 
Fort Sandusky (NSO) . 
. Fort Charlatte (RFA) 
Froaty Moller (Mollers) 
Grandview . (Sahsoun) 
Great Eagle (Coton) 
Green Tlanwer (RFA) .. 
Chung (Lee Bros 
Hela (CMBN) 


tho 


at Nan (CMBN) 
Hewasang (Jardine) 
Hinghal (B & 8) 
Mo. Kwang (APC) 
Hock Lim (Eastern) 
| Mudson (Tak Kee) .. 
Hung Cheng (CMSN 
Inchmay (Willlameon) . 
Inchmat} — (Willlamson) 
Jeep: Hee (Jebshun) ...+. 
Mul Jin (Tak Kee) +++ 
Lady Wolmer (Roland) .. . 
Lake .Bhawnigen (esters) vee HD 
Lee Che (Minzaung) Ymt.; 
Leong Mee (Roland) . 
Lin Bhén (Jebshun) 
‘ Lu ¥t (BOTRA): 
Machoon (B & B) .. 
Margaret Moller (Mo 
Marie Skou ‘(Gilman) 
Mau aang (IM) 
Maxwell Drander 
Me! Ling (Botra) 
Ming Ch 
Mirama . 
Moldova (Eastern) 
Mount Mansfeld (APL) 
-~-Nan.-Chiang-. (Eastern) 
Nan Hal (Ming Bung) .vesecee 
Nankin Victary (China Unlon) - 
Nellore [Mac Mac) ...ss 
New World Victory (USL) «.- 
Nou Ohblang (Ming Sung) 
Ostbay (Chung Helngz) .. 
Pakho! (D & 8) 
Pel: Ming (Yee Tat Hong) 
Perico (Bintoon) os 
Plgnesu De Dehain 
Poltaya (Metro) .. 
Poyang (B & 8) 
Prince Salvor (Mo 
Pronto (Shul’ On) 
Bamona (Wallem) 
Ridderkerke (RIL) 
“Rosita (Carrio!) .. 
Sabre Canlm (Jardine). 
Sacramento (HEES) 
Bargen. (Eastern) seseee 
Ban ‘Antonio (¥ick Yuen) * 
Banbay (King Ta!) 
Ban Gebriel (Manners) 
Ban Miguel . (Manners) 
Ban Bria (Jebehun). 
Ban Roberto (Manners) 
Sbapur (Eastern) .. 
Bhirala (Mao... Mac) 
Bilverwaloct (RIL) . 
Bin ‘Boon Lee (Lee Bros.) .« 
Bing Hlox (Tong An) ..T 


De Larings {Trinity} 
ng Ha (Teh:Ho - 88)" 
Téng - Keng (CMBN) 
Tiihondok -(RIW),  « 


* Tranmusbar tea 

. (OMEN) 

_{ihagg aMUnRY 
fe hae Chang ng mace 


exAtlantic |) 


* Pacif.Transport:.(Janiine) . 


-| —Corfn — (Mac. Mac)_ eens Bi). eA. 
vee GU AD 


fear feck lacie 
‘exnaide (Thorsten 
Gertrude Maers! Ledeen 
Lalee Maersk (Jobsen) .. 
Montana’ (Dodwell)’ 
Pioneer Bea (UBL) . 
Pree, Buchanan (APL) 
Prea, Fillmore (APL) coscocsees 
Pros, Monroe (APL) secsccecueee 
Free, Johoson (APL) 

Beven Balen: (Mac: Mac 

Bteel Vendor (Gilman) . 

Bisel Voyager (Gilman) 

Titania * (Dodwelly 

Treln Maorak (Je! 

Vaaaltls (Loxley) 

War Tank (Waller 


Bonneville (Thotesen) . 
Mandyville --(Thoresen). ... 
Presa, Fillmore’ (APL) 


Fernfleld (Thoresen) 
Chineso Prince -(Jardine) 
Glenville, (Thorvsen) oes 
teh. Prince. (Jardine) 
streans (Thorenen) = 2.) 
PACIFIC COAST 


California, Dent. (UBL) 
Tradowind {UBL} ..- 


©, H Dant_(Dolwelly +. < 
American Transport (ardine) ° 
Califurnian (Dodweilp osc. we 
Generat Gordon (APL) .. 
Mathew - Luckenbach.- (us). . 
Pelican. State: (Gourlia) . «sssecoee 
Philippine: Transport -(Jardine) .. 
Vrea, Clevaland (APL) cessesoeee 
Pres, Harrieon (APL). 

Pree. .Mokintey.. (APL) 

Ferampote (E.A,) 

Bunnyville (Hank) 

Vesteroy (Watlem) 

Vinunea (Wallem) 


IK, Tennaport nrdine) 

Berea, Wilson (APL) evra 
AUSTRALIA 

"Ards (Dodwelt) 

Envtern Glory (Jardine) ccerseee 

Hindustan (Jardine) 

Kafristan (Jardiney dee 

CHINA 


. Choysang (Jardine) ex: -Tieninin 2. ° 26 
Munyang (0 & 8p ¢x-Tientaln 27-28 
Hunan (8 &° Ap exeTlentaln .4.. 0 28 
Sheng’ King-tD & 8) ex-Keelung 26 
Wing Bong (Jardine) 

EUROPE 


Antilochus (BD &' 8) ex-U.K, 
Anking (Bo & fi) ox-U.K 
Benvannoch . (Loxley) 
Sk (Jardine) 

zara (Cllman) .. 
Yatrvclua (B & 8B) ¢ 
Torrens (Thoresen) 


Autolycus (B. &°B) ¢x-U. 
Bennevils (Lioxy): .. 
Menlnwegs (Loxley) .. 
Rencruchan (Loxiley) 
Hennattow . (Loxley): 
Carthaze (Muo~Mse) 
Glengyle (Jordine).’ ex- 
. Hemiand (Gilman) 
Kampodin (E.A,) + 
Mentor (B & 8) . 
Meerkerk (RIL) 
Nordpol (E.A.)°  sesseeoe 
Nadnorahire (Jardine) 
Ringerd (MMM) 
Selandia (B.A.) «+ 
Shillong (Mac Blac 
Tallamans (Tharewen) 
Telemachus (B & B) 
Tonghal (Gilman) .. 


Ball (Giiman) . 
Bencleuch (Loxley) 
Benwyvia (Loxley) 
Champollion . (MM) 


Glenrey (Jnriiney 
Rinkerk (RIL) 

Budon (Moc Mae) 
Troja = (Thoresen) 


Canton (Mac Mac) ex-London «+++ 
INDIA 
andi; March’ 


Hinsang (Jarding) ex-Calcutta ., -261 
Oxarda (Mac Mac) ex-Bombay .. end’ 
Pemba {Mac Mac) ex-Bombay,.... 27 
Bangola (Mne Mue) ex-Calcutta .. 24° 

JAPAN 


aitern Baga ‘{dardine) 
Newchwang. (B & 8) exe 


“HHoogkerk fees 
Dotasevatn (hit 
Baluchistan (Jard 
Changsha (D & 8) 
Btnr Aleyuone (Everett) ¢x-Kobe 
Talrea (Mac Mac) 


dt “ 


* Meerkerk. (RIL) ii eesee 
Btrast Boenda, (RIL) . 
Stroat Malakke (nit) 
Tealeberm cay eocccerccsereses Bt! 


Junei 
Se weds early j i 


“ “pi fapen ae 
‘attison)ex-Manlia +f 
5), ex-Danghok «¢ 
MM) Tallaiphoag 2 
Blar. ‘Artturus. (Everett) ox-Baizen 
Banekok 


Bolssevain A 


Bradeverctt (ieee 

"Wm, Luckenbech..(UBLL)+ -weresese 

American’ Report (USL) ex-Manila 

Pioneer ‘Lake (USL), .oz-Manila~. 

» Ploner “Wvaee: (U8L)’. eo Masia 
es) 


* pare 
treat Bognta Snmty) we Mantla ve 


Py i Hermodd ( 


23 KHnyt Bakke (Meo Mag) 
Azeto nition” Ba 8, for New York 
Picneer Wave (US 
Lam Meera! 


teal. (Wallac). : 
Bt,, Advocate (Ullman), .) 
Mandeville. (Thoresen). 
Pres, Fi 


PA 

fo NN oie of 
Wm. . Glackeos .;(U! 
‘Tranquebar, :(E.A. 
California, Dear: (USL), 


Castleville (Bank). .-. 
. Tradewind (uah) for Fito, 


Wm, - Lockenbach (UBL). 
Ferfistream (Dodwell), 
CG. Ex-Dant (Dodwell). * 
Mathew: Luckenbach. (USL). 
Pres, Harrison (APL). 
Bkauvann (Mac Mac), -.: 
Parific Transport (Jardin 
American Transport (Ja! 
California (Dodwell), : 
Prea, Mckinley (AP L). 
Prea...Claveland (APL) for Frisco. 
Berampors (£.A.). 
.fallyrand (Dodweill), at 
Montana (Dodwell)” for . Beattie. 
Philipping Transport. (Jardine). 
General Gordon (APL). : 
Bouralnvitle” (Bank), - 


* gt, Advocate (aiiesan). 
Pre, Wilson: (APL). 
HK. Transport (Jardine). 


CHINA 
Mares . 
23 Yunan a e 8) for Keeluna. 
“23 Mupeh (0 & B). for Inchon, : 
28 Bhengking (BD & 8) for Kealung. 


29 Winxanne (Jardine) for Keelung. 
0 Choysani (Jardine) for Inehon, 


Glencoe (Patilecn) . 
“(Wallem) for Taingten, 


EUROPE 
March 


26 Automedon (0) & 8) for Marecilles 
end. Kvernaas (B.A.). 
April tte 
Beg. Nordpol (B-A.). 
Dew. Belaodia (As), 
Hoogkerk (RIL): * 


ie). 


for 


10 Ted! 


2 . 
8 Clty of Poona :(Dank), 

1 Bentawers (Tdaley). : . 
4 Benvonnoch (Lozley), + 
S&S Patroclus (Bit 8) for Havre. 
8 Breconshire (Jardine) for Aden. 
+48 ‘Nagara, (Giiman), 

'14 Carthage ‘(Mac Mae) for Loudon. 
14 

16 

16 

ai 

a 


Theorennitor (MM). 
Becotra (Mao“ Mac}. 
Torrens (Thoresen), 
Bennatow Chater) i 
Astllochus (A.@ 8), 
Bennevia (Lodley). 
M0. Hemland (Giimay), 
at Kambodia (BA). 


May : 
a Meerkerk (RIL)., . 
Bencruchan ( 


wry 
Ble. Mere Eglise Gad). 
Dencleuch (Loxley), 
Tullsman (Thoresen), 
June i 
early “Rinkerk - ap), 3 
§ Canton (Mad Mao) for ‘penton. 
10 La. Marselilaise corse) 
Marseilles, 420. 
14 Troja (Thoresen), 


for 


31, Talren (itae Mnc) for ‘Cafeutia, 


JAPAN 


" Botesevain (RIL), 

Berlaxe (EYL). 

Fangtien -(B. & 8):, for Tokohams. 
Talping (BD & 8): for Kare, A 
Slangola (Mso Mac). 

\Btar Araturus, (Everett). 
Pemba (Mac “Mac),'- 

Mao). 


darly Rebeverett . (Everett), 

21° Mevrkerk (RIL), ... “tw. 
1-2 + Hal: Meng ~(Thotéean), fot ‘aan 
1 Nagara (Gilman). for 

4. Hal. Meng (Thoreaeny for Yoko, 


23 
. aT 
26 
2) 
al 
end Oxards’ (Maa 


| Apet 


hama. vee 
17 ‘Btraat, Boends., (way, 
@ Bhitlops (Mac Mac). for Kobe, 


% Kafristan “Ward OF 

encly Hjnkerk . (RIL), 

18 Faatern Gloty: atest 

18 Temelberg (RIL! ‘ 
‘0 Le Marveillaise ‘an tor abe 


SOUTH HAST. porta 
‘Marehs": jas : 


“24 Bradeverut 
24 Boygalnville (Bank) for 


Tilead } 
Tilendang (Rik) “tor ‘Binfapere. 
i Ke ‘Pakho! (B &.'8}, bey minaken 
29°. Pigneau De “ant 
- "Gstgon. 
ta. Hal Lee Toe eben | 
s*, ane 
2 Tewane { tees ‘ox. Ba 5 ead. i 


18 Ploteer Ws 
a, Newehwas oe pag oe 
. “toe Denetee “| 


for 


‘Tittjaleogka. (RIL) oni va. Porte: 14), 


ext 


Tlentein and North China .ca 


ey pryina: 


Thoresdrt) for Yokokamii. " 


)) 
Batatee ON ie 


CPA 
, _ 2.10 pam 
PAA exeBan.-Franciscg, via. Honoluls, 
~ ‘Wake, Tokyo, Okinawat 12.46 p.m. . 
HK AIRWAYS ex Talpehi ‘4.15 p.m. 
BOAG ewTokyot aso ban: 
vas 
TOMORROW . 
AIR FRANCE ex-Halgon: 1.16 pm 
CPA ex-3lalphone!, 8..D. 
PAA ex-San Franelsco vii 
Midway, 
pms 
Tetanbul,, Damnacus, ‘Karachi, 
cutta, Bangkok: 2.18 pin, ¢ 
PAL ex-Manila, - 
POAS ex-Binuapore via Mangkoks 4 Pam. 
~ ‘MK AIRWAYS ox-Talpeh(' 4.15 p.m. 
‘DOAO ex-London, Nangkoks 4.40 p.m. 


SATURDAY : 
CPA ex-Bingapore via Banekokt 7 a.m 
PAA ex-Ban Francisco via Honolulu, 
Midway, Wake, Guam, Manflat’. 1.45" 
p.m. -New, York 
Istanbul, Dam s, Karachi, 
ta, Daogkokt 2.16 p.m, 
PAL ex-Manila: 10 a.m. 
NK AIRWAYS exe Taipeh: 4.16 pm. 


Departures 


TODAY 
PAL for New, York yin, Wangkok, Cal- 
cults, Karnch!,. Damascus, Istantnut, 
. Landon 2.80 pam. 
‘THK AIRWAYS for Talpeh: 9 a.m. 
‘CPAL for Tokyo, Vanemivers 2.30 pm, 


TOMORROW. 

CPA for Singapore yin Bangkoks 6.46 
a.m.3 Hnlphon: 7 a.m, 

PAA for New, York .via Bangkok, .Cal- 
‘eulin, Karachi, Damancun, Iatanbul, 
London: 2.30 p.m.; Han Francine via 
Manila, Guam, Wake, Midway, Hun 
Yulut 4.80 gxan.; Sian; Frenciaca VSa 
Okinawa, Tokyo, Wake, Honolulus 
6.20 pum, 

PAL for London vin Manila, Crleutta, 
-Harnchl, Lyditn,, Home, Madrid. 

BOAC for Bangkek, london: 7 a.m 

NK AIRWAYS for Talpch: 9. aan. 

BRAATHENS for Bangkok, Oslo: 9am, 

toe tate 
SATURDAY 

AIR FRANOF for Parla” 
: Balwons 6.4. a.m, 

CPA for Manilat 2 pm. . 

MATO for Maeno, 2.90, p.m, . : 

PAA. for Ban. Franclacy via, , Mantia, 
Guam, .Wake, Bildway, Ifonotulus 
Add pm. 

PAL for San Francisco vin” Manila, 
Monolulur 10.30 am, 

HK AIRWAYS for Tulpch! 0 om, 

BOAC ‘for Bingapore: 0 a.m, 


Honolulu, 


Cale 


Catecut+ 


via Itnnol, 


POST OFFICE 
MAIL NOTICE 


Outward | Malls ‘ 

Unregistered Lettera only for. Canton, 
Bwatow, « Amoy, .Yoorhuw,, Bhanghal, 
vpccepted 
at senders rlsk,and will’ be lod ae 
opportunity, offers. -: 

Unlesa : otherwise slated, Registered 
Artisies;. (by. Alr ,or .Bea) and Parcel 
Ponts, close ‘one “hour earlier. than, the 
mail, 1 male close ‘béfore +10 
roy istered ‘and, Parcel Posts clove 
{ &, p.m, on the previous day. ~Malts " 
‘are closed at Kowloon Central Post OMice’ 
oné hour carlfer than the GPO closing 
times, 


‘HUREDAY, MARCH 23 


A 

Alrmall for Mangoon, 

a {ro (Natrob! 
Dares, Salaam, Mauritlus; nnd: 
nesbure vip Cairo); Rome and Lom 
don, 6 p.m. 

Airmail ,«_ for 
Diakaxts, 
Auckland, 5pm. . , 7 

Alrmall for Taipeh, 8pm. * 


\" Closisie Thmes by Bea 
Bandaksn, 9 a.m, 
Formosa via Keelung, 2 ‘pam 1 
ert, via Inchon, ‘3 p.in. 
ahiia, 3 p.m. 
Btralts, 8 p.m 


. ZRUPAY, ‘maker a 
ng Times 
Alrmall for USA and Cansth. 1 p.m. 
Airmail for Holbow, 4. p,t, 
Alrmall for Malla, Cyan, Honohily, 
/UBA and Cariada, G pame - 
Ale Pateel Poste for Manila,. Honbtite 
wand UBA, 6 pane = 
+ Ordinary . Alrmall (Printed - Jaatters; 
Samples and, Smait Packet Posts). for. 
Manila, Guam, Honolulu ry U) 
8 pine 
‘Alrmall: for Singapore; Diakarts, 
. ney and Auckland, 6 p.m. 
Airmail fof Halpbong, Hanol, 
+. and. Paris, 5. pam... 
Alpmall for Talpeh, B p.m. 


_¢ ‘Clestng Tleave by Ben | 
» Bangkok, 5 ‘p.n. 
Halphong, 8 p.m 
Straits, Djakarts, 
Macaserr, 5 Pane 


‘sitruRbAI 
: Cleeiar Tiss i kie 
‘Alrmall- ‘for‘Manfld, I" asm. -)- - + 
Alrmall ‘for Bangkok, 


Singapore. 
Sydney and 


Bangkok, 
Colombo, 


walt 


— : 


loans Fihnee er Ale 
* Alrmall “Tor © “faleon "and fk 


iManllas 11.80 a.m. ex-Balgont be 


:¥ia London, | 


: eal | 


FREIGH 


aa. “MAUBANG NQ” 


5.9. “WH CeaNG 
as. “CHOYEANG" 


— | ee “HE! 


1 


DEPARTM| 
10 Pedddr. 8t. ‘Tal. "20814 


reece 


Wrst 


poe ae cy 

-CHINA S.N. CO., LTD, . : 
SAILINGS TO 

.. Sandakan . 


1 


Calcutta, Strat 
Balgon 
antein.: 


Gandakan, 


‘AUSTRALIA CHINA ae LTp. 


"ex. “'DALUCHIBTAN” 
. ae Pi a 
es. “EABTERN GLORY” Ja 


mv. “KAFIRISTAN 


“BALUCHIBTAN® i 
“EASTERN GLORY” Sydney, .Mélbolirne, Adelaide 

ae 4th May 
Sydney 


“Gav. “KAFIRIGTAN 


mv. “HINDUSTAN” 


*Cargo accepted on 
Fijl, New Zealand 


- SAILINGS: TO 
Sarena y: : 
50 pe area 


en, Ports 
_dapanene 1 Ports. 


ARRIVAL FROM 
pancso 'Pdrte .....55 at 


are 
eee 


& Fremantle ,..,.5+6. 


Led Pash Metbourne, 


Through Blite of bading for ¢ 
and Paalfio  istand Ports. 


GLEN LINE LTD. 


26th Mere: 
jet a Fe, 


‘M 
LA SUAN, 


8: ne} 
Adelaide >... 


8th be 
tBth | 
o Oth Hed Z 


. “6th Apre 


6th May 


_ SAILINGS “‘O U.K. CAND CONTINENT VIA-SUEZ 
mv. "BRECONBHIRE" ‘ 


Léads ‘6th 


Adon, Sue, 


werp, ‘Rot 


‘(Cartler'e ‘option to’ ‘preg 


dam & Homburg. die tondon 


“ARMIV. ‘ALS ‘FROM, U.K. -VIA ‘STRAITS 


“GLENGARRY: 


“HADNORGHIRE” . 


“GLENGYLE” 
“GLENHOY” | 
an ‘oltward ve 


if 


PRINCE LINE LTD. 


Agril—Bills 8th April for. Stealts, ‘Cotombo, 
Port Bild, Alexandria, Genoa, London, ‘Ante 


16th May. 


id via: other ‘porta to load/diecharge) 


Leaves Loridon: duo : ‘Hong: ‘Kong 


‘aiRIVits” Fitom_ Us. ‘ATLANTIC & PAcIFic- ronirs 


inv. “JAVANESE. PRINCE” . 
mv. "CHINESE PRINCE” 
8.2. “BRITIBH PRINCE” 


mv."SILVER WAL 


Loads ‘23th 


land, 8an 


All above sailing. %& arrivate dre 


216t Apr “40th May ° 
. Oth "May 27th May 
14th June 


NU 
hb for Va 
Franojeco ', Los Angeles, 


3rd Jone 
‘gard June 


and duly ‘29th uly 
TRANSPACIFIC SERVICE ‘ 


Ver, Boattlo Tacoma, Port. 


ubject.to alterailon. withats. notice 


All intending ‘Passengers ‘are reatetied to reolster thelr. nanies.as 


far as possible in advance of the tlme 


which, they ‘wish to teave. . 


FIG TRANSPORT LINES 


“ARRIVALS: FROIA. 


6s. “AMERICA TRA 
a8. “PHILIPBINE. T 
‘ee. “HONGKONG + 


- REGULAR SAILINGS TO. Us. 


Snag 
pee 


SAN. FRAT — 


phot. 
PORT? . 


Sp id 
ANT nd Ab 


te ‘th Apt. 


Via Manila, Cebti & Los Angeles. 
SamRT TH VCR ICYC Re 
“ei ee, “AMERICA TRANG ee A ey : 


Benny “SRANBPORT”’. 


re 7ALLY 
“sh, 


IPPINE TRANBPORT'. «., 
“HON KONG Aedes 23 


Se dvas 


“Ain 


10th, 


a. 


ACIFIC ale 


Through’ bille. Ga lado sued? “to “sit “golds da 


‘North Aitisrica, a 


JARDINE, MA 


bos ‘Pedder’ Street 


uth, Amerfoan 1, Portas, 
MATHIES SON § C0, b 
bY 


‘if. ; 


‘ab3h1 > 


eee yee Be i 


SWISS WATCH 


‘, get the paper’ print antl-Sovict 


- United Press, 


‘tennis champion, Benzin Saw. 


‘ Gel, eyes began ‘to open with in- 


oand drops, aided by a. serles of 


‘ which went to Saw 15<4. :. 


‘Chu Chi-cho, 


LEE BEATS LOW TO 


waanneenmeennes 


; Serre 
Lf Soyer 
eas eth te 


: ENTER 
AL 


(By “ARGONAUT”) . ; ? 
Lovt-handor C. K. Leo, holder of the Colony Singlos | | YESTERDAY'S 
" -¢itle, reached the final of this year's .Singlos SOCCER RESULTS 
Badminton Championship when he odged out _AT A GLANCE . 


the Univorsity and formor Malayan Doubles 
Champion, K. S. Low, in two thrilling sots, 
18-13 and 15-13, at Recroio last night. 

An all-Chinese YMCA final is therefore assured, 
Robert Tay being the other: finalist, -. * 


Another feature of last} and Margaret Xavier, twlee hold- 
night's wames was the excel-] ers of the title, had to ght for 
font. diiplay of the schoolboy { every point In the firat set. Tho 

score mounted evenly up to 1l- 
all when services changed hands 
eight times before their greater 
steadiness gave them the four 
needed polnts, In the second set, 
the challengers, struck .brilliant 
-form when they were down 5-6, 
scoring nine successive points be- 
tween then. They ultimately. took 
the set 15-7, The champlona 
took no chance in the third sca 
‘and ‘playing thelr usual game 
took dt with the concession of 
only five points, to enter thejr 
third Mnul.in, the event. 

Full results . 
Schoolboys’ Doubles: F, Allaye 


and J. Pomeroy, Jr., (La Salle) 
beat M, Nolasco and G. Pomeroy 


Having created a major upset 
carlier in the tounrament when be] 
elimuinnted seeded “player C.M. 
Quinn in the Junior Men's Stagles 
cvent. he created) even a greater 
purprise lust night, when he oust- 
ed University’s ST, Hool, top: | 
favourite tar the title In three sets. 

The ight programme of tive 
inatthes  ytave the pucked — hall 
thele most ttalning badininten 
vet served a oth in quality 
and thrills and excitement. Four 
of the Ove games went to the fuli 
distance of three sets, 

hacthe curtain ¥ 
and d) Pomeroy, Jt 


. ANnye 
were taken te 


three hhardfought sets, — before i +h 

quilifying fer the Schoolboys’ (ha Salley, 18-5, 10-15, 18 oo 
Doubles nal, M. Nolasco and J.) (ghatlanders and Asin College) 
Pemeroy Jreench on one side} peat 8. T, Hooi (University), 


15-5, 6-15, 15-4. . 
.Junfor Men's Doubles: Austin 
Ho and K, F, Chiu (Chung Wah) 


were conspicueus with some good 
play, Ta ‘ 


Saw’s display 


beat Bill Chow and C. H.- Ngan 

Very few, If any, tast night. i 
conceded a change to Bonzin {Shallanders), 15-12, 12 15, 
Saw when he took the court Ladles’ Doubles: Mrs. H, F. 
-againat University’s -8..T, Hooil Gonsalves ond Misa M, Xavicr 
in the Junior Singles event. (Reerclo) bent Misa M. Ribeiro 


When, however, the schoolboy. 


ane nnd Mrs. M. Rozarlo (Reerelo), 
With amazing agility took a lead 


15-11, 7-15, 16-5. 

Senlor: Men’s Singles: C. X. 
Lee (Chinese, YMCA) beat K. s. 
Low (University), 18-13, 15-13. 

Tonight's games 
COLONY CHAMPIONSHIP 
SEMI FINALS ‘ 
At Kowloon Cricket Club 

7.30 p.m, Schools’ Doubles:—-K. 
Y. Tro (St. Pauls). and B. Saw 
(Asia) v E. C. Y. Hsi and S. Hei 
(Wah Kiu). 

8,00 p.m. Junior Men's Doubles: 
—S,_K. Cheong and S, F. Lam 
(University). v N. K,-Chin and Kk. 
K. Loke (University). 

8.30 p.m. Senior Men's Doubles: 
—C, -K. Lee and W. F. Foo 
(Chinese YMCA) v:G. Lum and 
3. Koo (Shallanders). . 

9.00 p.m. Ladies’ Singles:—Miss 
U, Khoo (Chinese YMCA) v Mys. 
M. Rozarlo (Recreio). 

9.30 p.m. Senior Men’s Doubles: 
—P, H. Wong and R. Tay (Chinese 
YMCA) v Bill. Funk and" S, K. 
Howe (Shailanders). 


terest, With necurate drop shots, 
powerful emashea and good re- 
triovings, Sow curried his lead. t 
11-4 and 15-6 for the first set. 
The second set saw the Univer- 
sity undergrad displaying his best 
form, With well-placed smashes 


errors from Saw, Hooi returned 
compliments by taklag the second 
s t 15-6. Saw’s speed and almost 
Hmitless gtamina proved too much 
for his opponent tn the third -set,: 


The Junior Men's Doubles be- 
tween Austin Ho and KF. Chiu 
and BI Chow: and G. H. Ngan, 
also went. to the full distance of 
three sets, The Chung Wah palr 
of Ho and’Chiu could not be sald 
to be In thelr best form although 
they won the first set 15-12, 
Thelr tendency to repeated crrord 
was noticeable in the second set 
when Chow and Ngan, particue 
Jarly Chow rallied back to taka 
it by 15-12. ,A neck to neck 
struggle cnsucd in the third set 
un to 10-8 in favour of Chow and 
Nyan,-Tlo-then-brought-up-some 
KLOd serves and smashes to add 
six noints.in a row. Amidst great 
excitement Chow and Near 
caught them up to 13-14 bufil- 
could not get the extra point for 
deuce, With the next service tha 
Chung Wah pair scored the vita! 
point, which brought them to the 
Anal In this event. ‘ 

The Ladics’ Doubles Semi-Nnal. 
although nan-all Recrelo affair, 
took their Cull’ share of the even- 
ing's spotlight, Mrs, Gonsalves 


Peking Radio 
. On arrest of | 


' ’ 3 
S'pore editor 
San Francisco, March 22, 
Pcking: Radio today protest- 
ed against the arrest of a Chin- 
ese editor in Singapore, and 
said Peking Press circles were 
paying close attention, to the 
arrest and detention of Mr. 
editor of the 
pinggpore “Nan Chisu Jit 
a0. 


The brondenst sald: “A report 
on the matter was received by 
the Commission of Overscas 
Chinese Affaira. of the Central 
Peopic’s Goverrinient.. .Recently 
‘pressure was brought to bear: to 


Suggestion that specified 


“Make the punishment 'fit 
the crime.” is his argument. 
What he would like to see is 
a new law that when a play- 
cr fouls another, causing him 
to be injured sufficiently to 
have to leave the field, cither 
for a short period or.for the 
remainder - ofthe’ game, thé 
man who commits the offence 
should also leave, . 

“A rule such as this would be 
casy to implement,” says Mr. 
Henderson.’ “If the referee 
awards a free kick a foul must 
have been committed, so he 
should have no difficulty in de- 
elding whether or not: to send 
off (t © offender, Gane , Of 
course, that the Injure layer 
has left the feld.” eae 

The argument fs that “it is 
unfalr for the innocent side to 
be «handicap; by having on} 
10. men, ‘when ‘the: side. whic 
has been responsible for the in- 
jury, If it wero held to be ‘de- 


antl-Communist, anti-popular 
handouts’ of‘ the paint govern- 
ments This the paper refused to 
‘“The: uriworranted arrest. .... 
proves the representatives of the 

ritish ‘imperialism in Singapore 
are intensifying their persecution ‘ 
of. oversch# Chinese in the area] liberate, cashes in, ‘as “it: were, 
and ore ready" to trample on|on its rivals’ misfortuno.: 
freedom of speech and of.person.”|.. Somehow } don’t think -any- 
: : thing of that kind would prove 


. ; — t-80—-many-people overlook 
rae -[ isthat frequently, a side’ which 


GAME:FOR .- has Jost ‘the services of one ‘of 


‘| self in Burma, Malaya and Can- 


(By TOMMY LAWTON) 


, the real antidote to rough play,|- 


- sehoouneys . [Sgcar | 


‘Pr and-was kicked: i 


-FIRST DIVISION 


Club. *' . 3 South China 1 
KMB . 2 Police 1 
| Royal. Navy 3 Kwong Wah 1 


; BECOND DIVIBION 
Royal Navy 4 Yard Pollee 1 
Solicitors’ “« -.2 Taikoo 0 
South China 2 ‘Prison's -2 


Interport boxing 
tournament 


An Interport Boxing Turna- 
ment between Chinese boxers of 
Hong Kong and Canton will be 
staged at Caroline Hill on Sotur- 
day, commencing ut 7.30 p.m. 
under the auspices of the Gouth 
Chinn Athletic Association and 
Johnny Lal's Gym. 


Main event on the programme 
.of seven events will be the bout 
between Johnny Lal, the Hong 
Kong Champion, and Peter Fong, 
who has made.a nome for him- 


ton. 
The following js the pro- 


gramme:— ; 
J. Tse Kal-chi v Chan Cheuk- 


fi. 
2. Cheung Chi-wah v_ Tse 
~~" Kajechau, . 


3. Fong Kl-kong v Luk Fun. |}. 


4. Yeung Ka-tsol v Henry 


Huang. ane 
5. Liu Hon-kong v Li Ka-pak. 
6.. Chung Fook-lun v ‘Albert 

Huang. 
1: Johnny Lai v Peter Fong. 
In addition to the seven box- 
ing. events, a wrestling contest 
will also: feature the programme. 

ee cet 


HKFC LAWN BOWLS 
GREEN OPENING 


The Hong Kong Football Club 
Lawn Bowls-Green will open on 
Tuesday, March 28, ‘when a 
Wappinshaw Competition for 
members. will be played, com- 
mencing 5.15. p.m. ua 


BILLIARDS. 


Chung Sing beat Police Reserve 


In. the Billlards Lengue lost night 
by three matches to two and by 
654 to 603 points. By their vic- 
tory, Chung Sing won all three 
points, 

In the other game, Eastern 
accounted for the Royal Alr 
Force. by four matches to one, 
The victory gave. Eastern ‘three 
points, 


— 


Antidote for rough 
play--new ; 


periods of absence from 


the soccer field for players who commit 
offences—the ice hotkey “cooler” system— 
has becn made from time to time. 

Quite the most novel idea for dealing. with rough 
_ play from T. M. Henderson of Northampton. 


It's‘ happened so many time? 
that almost everyone must havi 
scen jt at some time or another. 

in addition, ‘It would ‘only 

serve one more headache for 
" raforces. 
Thcy would have the onus o! 
deciding whether an offence: wa: 
committed deliberately, and, even 
though, thore Is frequently -n- 
doubt about a foul, being able tc 
pin-point degrees of wilfulness | 
another matter. 
.T have scen: offences which. 
from the touchlines, must have 
had all the stamp of malic: 
aforethought,: yet, to the ‘more 
experienred'cye of a player, ‘it 
has been: ohvious that the man 
tackling wer just a split-second 
late’ golng for the hall... ~ 

» One. particular Incident in o 
game I saw recently, a replayed 
Cup-tlo, in’ which ‘ploverg on both 


sides' had .reached the stage of 


dishing. ie out, atarids out. , 
_. ‘Going. through) - - 
“A 7 @ through 


‘e hitthe? ball‘all’ right;: 
as’ he did 80, his back‘ foot -went 
trom underneath him ‘on treachor- 
us ground, Just at: that: mome 
the defendor arrived on’ the spo! 
the chest... : 


an @ 
Sry rig 
well 


~ HONG KONG, 


215 pm. Jaguars v Accs (Danig. 


her, playcy would, hava 


ra 


THURSDAY, MARCH 23, 1950." = 


7 A ‘Ro ya | = 


Both Club .Houses 


\city: for the 


the: second morning. ~~. 


Many good cards were re-., Best Scratch Score Bronze Divi. | 
urned during the Meeting and| sion Mrs, Stoker, : 
é ; dest Scratch Score Bonre Divi+ 
a eon wore sion Mra, A. Dawson Grove. 


: : Best Score on Hidden nine Mrs. 
- Short approaching and putting 


J. D, Clague. a 
wus done on Tuesday atternoon, Foursomes on Old Course .Mrs,_ 
after which Mrs. F, D. Hunter, 


Fiercy and Mrs, ‘Cassidy; after a 
‘Captain, presented ‘the prizes. 


{ie with Mrs, Barton. and Mrs. 
‘These recelving Cups and prizes 


Dawson Grove. eat 
Boxey Competition Mra, M,. 


Robertson. 


verei=~ : ; 

ore Dogey Compotition runner-up 

Ludies Club Champlonship—| yirg R. Hitt after a Ge with Mrs 

Mrs. JA. Piercy. ° S, Rudrof and Mrs, M. Elilot. - 

‘Bronze Div, Championship—| ~' Appronching ‘and putting Mra, 

, . per eae ae Mrs. «A. Dawson Grove. nicky Y, Williams, _ cae: 
Monaveen (left) and Inverlochy, taking the tart Jurip in the Willlameon’ Handicap Steople- Bronze «Div. runner-up—A'rs) putting: Mrs. Sainsbury, 


Puttlng runners up Mrs. Arm-* 


A. S. Adamson. 
strong and Mrs. Mackie. . 


chase at Hurat Park, Taggart Cup, winner—Mrs. F. 


Family's hope for the forthcoming Grand Natlonal.-(Agsoclated Press Photo}. * . ‘Dp. Hunter. io , Bllver spoons were presentec 
. ae : ; Taggart. Cup’ - runner-up—Mrs.| *-¢9 those qualifying in the Cap 
ott A, Florey. tain’e Cup for January and 


Hailway Cup winner—Mrs. Pote 
Hunt, 

Rallvay Cup runner-up—Mrs. 
M, Elliot. tf - . 
“Rose Cup winner— Mrs, A. 
Shewan (who‘has gone on Homd 
Leave). ae ; 
Roro Cup runner-up—Mrs, A. 
Piercy. . 

Captain's Cup winner—Mrs. .J. 
B. Mackie. : 

Captain's Cup runner-up—MIrs. 
S. '‘Rudrof. 
‘The matches .for the above 

named Cups. have been played 

over the past two months. 


Fabruary, namely .Mre. .Pote 
Hunt. Mee. P. Watson, Mere 
McAvoy and Mrs. Stoker, at 
The L. G. U. Monthly’ Medal; 
prize for Morch was given td the: 
“winner Mrs, J. Strickland. — 
Several’ of the prizes :- were, 
given by members and others," 
all of which were: greatly ap: 
precioted -and admired... 0 5° 
The Karen Trophy presented « 
by Mr. King went to Mrs. Haig‘ 
for the Best Scratch Score. 


Sof tall: 

Important fixtures on 

week-end programme. 
"(By “GRANDSTAND”) 


This work's programme features several important 


‘Tennis final 
set today 


The |‘ Cotony  Grasecourt 
Singles, tonnis final between 
_|p -Koon-hong and Taul Wal- 
wal-pul,. which. was to be 
played yesterday was called 
off'on account of, the rain, 

The match will Instead take 
place this afternoon starting 
at 4.30 p.m, ° aye: 

Tha Doubles final has been 


‘Succossful . year 


ame: i : competitioris: held . he: 
gomet, ond the Lodi Juni Longue cham- | awards aut” "| gh ies tre Sl Maa a" Sma 

ing by a‘full game, take on White Fangs. ° POPOPPRROIODIOOPPOISSS | OT cloctio—Nirs,- J. Wal. and: thanked. ail members-.for:4 

In the Sénior’ League play-off, Jaguars meet. EXHIBITION Be ae ee ee te. Euiot,| Helping to. make the meeting sucls 
Americans on Saturday, while St. Joseph's BASEBALL Christmas Medal — Mra. H.| | Sho voleed tho\fecting. of a 
clash with Braves. - The Men's Junior’ loop ech tena Cote 7 ee Medal — Mrs, D. L. work a3 Handicap Manager sd 
fixtures will be completed on Saturday, when | Philadelphia (National) *14,] PHORNCY sao narg. R, Arkcoll jouving the Colony: very’ soon. 7 


.| Cincinnati (National) 4. 
New. York (American) 4, Bos- 
ton: (National) 2. 
Baltimore (International) 6, Phi- 
ladelphia (American) 4, 
Detroit (American) 11, Boston 
(American) 5. - 
Brooklyn (National) 5, 


Mrs, Hunter. proposed: a yote ¢) 
of thanks to Mre. A. Joombs, 
the Honorary Gecretary of she: 
Ladies Gectipn and Mrs." 8trio 
tand epoke for the mambers 
thanking the Ladtes: Commi 
for m succossful 


“7 the Jaguar’ Cubs. meet the Aces. ” 


In_ the Inter-Hong league, Recrelo F/B Ground : 
the best game should be the] 0.30 a.m.’ Mohawks v Delawarca 
Caltex v. Civil Service clash, (Fred Diesta). 


b 11.00 am. Saints v Bluebirds; 
us both outfits are out to annex Ugmar Eriksen). 


winner, . 
’ Mra. A. 


Spring. Mecting winners 
‘Winners of ‘events played at 


§, Adamson runner up. 


nd’. pleasant. 


the San Miguel trophy. Meeting were aa 
None a ithe batting leaders ae eee v Blackhawks; worth (Texas) 1. Fort i aed 4 : Gotrng om ee 
connected for a single safc- Sale . ; cf h, Silver Ly n OF rizes 
last week, and the top perch is 1 ioe NY Lions: (Re pee ania * New! sivision hie Av E.G. Halg tea was served In tho Bodies 
now’ held: by.“ Madeapnee Hanne ! ‘St couls (American) 1, Cleve-| -Best Nett Score Silver Division| Club House, | 


Although this Mecting oficlally ° 
closes the Cup Competitions at 
Fanilng; the L.0.U.. “Monthly, 
Medal on the first ‘Tuesday. ud, 


Latest batting averages, lana Mrs, W. N. A. Smalley; safter a 


{Sequiera who-has completed his 
tle with Mrs. K. S, Robertson. 


fixtures. ° : 
It seems from this corner that 
tne other contestants for the title 
will ‘suffer further, .as they have 
to play off a six-game_ serics 
aga inst the'tream of “the~clrcult.’ 
"A revised programme for: the: 
rematnder of the season has. becn 
circulated to managers, and in 
view of the short time available 
for completing the scaoson's fix- 
tures, managers should note that 


Anclud- (American) 6,—Assoclated 


cach month os well as: th 
Monthly qualifying rounds for: 

Captain'a--- meeting ---at—-Fanlin| 
On the ‘Tied “Thiewday.: Apel 
+ On tho r lay, rif: 
20, a-prize: day. will’ bo-held: the’ 
fer gaat will: be . announced 
ater, eet ag 
‘The Summer .Scason’ will. start 


ing games of 19.3.50: - 
3 Press, 
MEN'S SENIOR LEAGUE « ut 
\ GAB H Ave. : . . : ; 

Ren Soquicra .... 15 54 23.426 y, hti jottings: , . 
Spiky” Guterrea” 2727147437187419 | AC ing-} 9g PR nia eee ae 
Tony Osmund .... 14 42 17 .405{ ——— 
Igmar_ Eriksen .., 14 48 19 388). 
Erle Guest 16 67 22 386 

LADIES JUNIOR LEAGUE 


no further postponements will be| C Arnulphy ...... 10 36 15.417 ‘ toe ; a ee are at ‘Deep’ Water Bay in. April 

considered. : G. Silva ......+e¢ 10 32 13 408 ’ ; fixtures will also be ‘announced 
Programme. cramped | f2y"°G, Sez" «--- 2 34 12 353) ragon ser /es r ace early. noxt month, «4 
With an all-time record num-| V. Gonsales ...... 9 25 7 280 : eee oes : : é “ 


‘ber of participating teams this 
year, the programme has-' been’ 
cramped, and this ‘has been com- 


.MEN’S, JUNIOR LLEAGUE- 


“Strikers clash 


Joey Graca-'.. 15:32 21 .404 
mented by followers of the game. . ; Raden Fahne 
Rpongam fen hear) e,camecior 13 4H 301] aces ‘started anid anly-one finished... | with: naling! 
ered next season, all of which | Harald’ Ong ....-. 13 05 ga 360] After'q start in the Dragon Class, ‘Vanessa got, on. WIth: " police 
have. been covered in the’ pre~ Pas: Hopi as a8 Ot ab ate ‘q@ beat to’ No. 2 buoy, while the remainder, -|. . . i It | 
060! agers’ mee a ic | ae : Be daa H ey sith. 4 : 
current “programme was drawn “én or away from the line, began to run with | n Way. 


:” Rome,” March 22. 


up in accordance -with ~ thelr. —_ ee oss i i } 
wishes. gramme for the week) - -- CRUSADERS’. _ Segging spinnakers te (Chonhel. Roe, ; The pollce fired into the alr. 
ull gro; soa Z “ - sea aay i th , z 
° Peshened ne -. HOCKEY XI: ; The-run, as the wind chang cn. | to. drive off a Conimuntist mob: 


is as follows: . atege 
MEN'S BENIOR LEAGUE | 
Saturday: ,CBA ;Ground.~: 


ed, ‘becume‘a beat | 
fotfowed .by a run to H.W.D.2, 
a reach to.far.APC and a run|. 


advancing on the Itallan For+ 
elgn.Office today in’ the. most 
serious incident of tho: 12-hour’:4 


Dinghy Serics leaders _ 
The Dinghy Serics which will 
be continued’ -untll May 21, is 


334 pam. Jaguars x Recghaitrrid Pte Sookutt ; home::::- . ae 1 strike.’ ‘The ‘ft 
*"* Plate’ Umplie: Don’ Robbins,| at ‘the Sookunpoo - Vahessa'' 1 i he nd} becoming close, ns helmsmen be-{'gencral strike, : ‘The : flurry: oc 
scorer Samet Samy). |. | bully-off 5.90 Pim. 0 os ie ata chia vercalnder, gin to ellminato-thelr, worst-re-| curred :.in downtown . Rome 


J. Dick. J. W. AL 
Colsico, PR. Ragi, J.D. Mackie, 
™M., AR.’ Lovatt. J. Alloman,~A. 
W. Levett, J. -P.. O'Discoll, 'P. 
Gibbons,-A. Stewart. i 


at noon. Paint. ee 


"Riot squagn. ‘drove , Joop: 
the crowd and broke, up: thi 


Sunday: CBA. Ground _ 0 

11.00 a.m. St, Joseph's. v Braves;| 
(Fintce Umpire’ Buster’ Ho'- 
lands, scorer Wanda. Rod- 
riques).- .. -0 8 oes 
MEN'S JUNIOR LEAGUE 

Saturday: GBA -Ground . 


Agtior , remainder.) Fitts, « 
Sioa! ae ‘ ba s ane _ |, The leaders in tHe serics now 
“The Cruiser race, which should] @&me— > oan 
hove started, on Sunday. morning,| -1st Calay 6477 ‘pointe 
‘was postponed, It will ba sailed 

over the: urs 


into 
dew 


Pid fade: co cata ay Cafes Jt. | Aprit:2. 
; | Kec CRICKET TEAM |g ee me cae 

LADIES SENIOR LeAGue || | Tho. following /have. been sc~ be be-t oth Tt “ ""y4a000 
Saturday: Recrelo :F/5- Ground -' lected to represent. the into 
345 p.m. Flrates v~-Cangdians: Cricket Club ists XI in-a- Lea; 
"G 


- cricket match agalnst ‘Royal Air 
A crap Cantro ;,/and Bimbl Fores at Cox's Hoad.on.Saturda. 


oN etsy ‘| Mareh. 25,° comm 
~ LADIES JUNIOR LEAGUE : 


. Teast’ and Roberto: Nunes). 


1.48 
p.m, 4 


Surday: CBA.Ground: "°°, R, E. Lee, ‘W.-H. Colledgo; W, 
eee White, Fangs v “.8t:|M. Davidson, F..R.° Kermani, J. 
0 Teresa: (Rennie Sequiera and 


INTHRHO 
on rday: ca 


want It.jand (later a 
‘ashore Pie salting or of 


