The Ambassador in China (Gauss) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/15287
 
[Document 287]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Gauss
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
No. 2208
 
 
Chungking
, February 21, 1944.
[Received March 6.]
 
 
 
Sir
: I have the honor to enclose a translation
71
 of a pamphlet entitled “China Needs True Democracy” published in September 1943 by Mr. Chang Lan (also known as Chang Piao-fang), recently named President of the Federation of Chinese Democratic Parties. Mr. Chang, 72 years of age, is now resident at Chengtu and is considered a distinguished scholar. He was at one time civil governor of Szechuan Province, of which he is a native, and from 1918 until 1931 he was President of Chengtu University. He was appointed a member of the People’s Political Council in 1938 and, although he is not believed to 
be a member of any political party, he was named President of the Chinese Federation of Democratic Parties in recognition of his standing and his liberal views.
 
The pamphlet written by Mr. Chang is typical of many writings of this kind which are being published for appropriate distribution in China. Several of the minority party leaders and other intellectuals have written pamphlets similar in vein to this one.
 
The pamphlet attacks the Kuomintang’s “period of political tutelage” excuse for failure to institute constitutional government, party rule, the party’s attempt to build up the picture of an exalted leader, the use of secret police and the failure of the Kuomintang to train the people in the application and exercise of democracy. The author appeals (1) for the immediate establishment of an open and legal consultative body to study the draft constitution and work for constitutional government; (2) for freedom of speech, press, assembly, association, residence and person; (3) for the immediate recognition of the legal existence and activity of political groups and parties outside of the Kuomintang; and (4) for the empowering of the various public bodies, such as the People’s Political Council, the Provincial Assemblies and the hsien councils, prior to the establishment of constitutional government, to investigate the budgets and to check the illegal activities of the officials of the government. It is stated in the pamphlet that China’s present-day single party dictatorship and “party-izing” (compelling officials, the armies, the police and students to become party members and the widespread establishment of party branches in every organization) are fundamentally opposed to democracy and government by the people. China is said to need democracy as the political form which is most humanitarian and most in accord with the spirit of the times.
 
Respectfully yours,
 
 
C. E. 
Gauss
 
 
 
71
 
Not printed.