The Consul General at Kunming (Langdon) to the Ambassador in China (Gauss)
 
893.42/8–3144
 
[Document 421]
 
The Consul General at Kunming
 (
Langdon
) 
to the Ambassador in China
 (
Gauss
)
42
 
 
 
No. 38
 
 
Kunming
, August 31, 1944.
 
 
 
Sir
: Referring to the Embassy’s memorandum of August 16, 1944, in regard to a reported democratic student movement, I have the honor to report information obtained by the Consulate General regarding activity among Chinese university students at Kunming.
 
 
 
Summary
. There are indications of the existence of an under cover “democratic movement” among the students of National Southwest Associated University, which will reportedly take some kind of public action, though not of a drastic nature, within the next two months. This movement is said to be supported by the Federation of Chinese Democratic Parties. Students are less apathetic than during 1943, but although there is more dissatisfaction among students than during the days of Peking student movements the unrest is not expected to result in the public demonstrations which marked the former student movements. Fear of the Central Government’s secret police is a restraining factor. Dissatisfaction with the treatment of student interpreters may cause an outbreak of trouble if the Central Government attempts to enlist additional students as interpreters from the National Southwest Associated University. 
End of Summary.
 
 
 
[Here follows detailed report.]
 
 
Conclusion
 
 
It may be concluded that the students at Lienta are strongly dissatisfied with present conditions in China, both with respect to their own circumstances and the existing military, political and economic 
situation. A strong open protest against such conditions is, however, made difficult because of the lack of sufficient organization among the students and the existence of Central Government “spies” among the students, who would be expected to report promptly to the Kuomintang authorities the establishment of any strong protest movement. The Central Government, in turn, would likely take steps to meet a protest movement by the dismissal from the university of the ringleaders or by the arrest of such persons. It is, however, encouraging that in the midst of Kuomintang repression and in the face of secret police activity Chinese university students have shed some of their former apathy and are showing a renewed interest in political and economic questions of importance to the future of their country.
 
Respectfully yours,
 
 
 
Wm
. R. 
Langdon
 
 
 
42
 
Copy transmitted to the Department by the Consul General at Kunming; received September 15.