The Ambassador in China (Gauss) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/9–2244
 
[Document 445]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Gauss
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
No. 2991
 
 
Chungking
, September 22, 1944.
[Received October 25.]
 
 
 
Sir
: With reference to the Kunming Consulate General’s despatch no. 51, July 14, 1944, and the Embassy’s despatch no. 2900, August 
23, 1944, in regard to the activities of the Democratic League (formerly known as the Federation of Democratic Parties) and other elements in opposition to the National Government and the Kuomintang, I have the honor to enclose a copy of a letter dated September 13, 1944, received from Consul Philip D. Sprouse at Kunming, transmitting a translation of the “Draft Political Principles of the Democratic League.”
86
 
 
Mr. Sprouse states that the Draft was prepared by Dr. Lo Lung-chi (See Embassy’s despatch no. 2797, July 22, 1944
86a
 for a biographical despatch [
sketch
] of Dr. Lo) and that it represents the ideas of the group of League members at Kunming. Mr. Sprouse suggests that the Draft is a “compromise between Anglo-Saxon ideas of Democracy and the Soviet Russian system” and that much of it “seems to stem from a desire to correct existing ills in the present Chinese governmental system.”
 
Mr. Sprouse observes that included in the Draft are “political sops to all groups in China.” Indeed, it seems to have been drawn up on the principle of “all things to all men”. Its provisions seem to be utterly Utopian and visionary and scarcely capable of implementation and enforcement in the China of today.
 
According to information available to the Embassy, the Democratic League does not appear to have been very active in recent weeks. There is a growing impression that the various elements constituting the League have been unable to arrive at a mutual understanding and that there exists a general lack of harmony and mutual confidence. Several members of the League (or the political groups making up the League) attended the session of the People’s Political Council concluded in Chungking on September 18, 1944, and were conspicuous among the delegates who were most critical of the policies and administration of the Kuomintang and the National Government. According to reports from local sources, and seemingly corroborated by reports received from Kunming and Kweilin, the Democratic League proposes to convoke a meeting of its representatives at Chengtu in the near future at which League policies and activities will be discussed. It is not known whether “dissident” military elements from Kwangsi, Yunnan, Szechuan and other areas plan to participate or otherwise take note of the proposed League meeting at Chengtu.
 
Recent reports from Kweilin suggest that the reported plans of General Li Chi-shen to form a separatist administration in the southeastern provinces have not crystallized and may have collapsed entirely. Following the rapid Japanese advance on Kweilin, General Li is reported to have left Kweilin about the beginning of September 
for his ancestral home at Wuchow, Kwangsi, which is now threatened by Japanese investment from the Canton-Samshui area. General Li’s future plans are unknown to the Embassy: according to one report, he proposes to proceed into eastern Kwangtung to continue his activities and, according to another, he plans to go to Liuchow and perhaps later to western Kwangsi. Present developments, including the probable Japanese occupation of the greater part of eastern Kwangsi at an early date, would not seem to favor the accomplishment of any plans General Li may have for the formation of an independent regime in the Southeast.
 
Respectfully yours,
 
 
 
C. E. Gauss
 
 
 
86
 
Neither printed.
86a
 
Not printed.