The Ambassador in China (Gauss) to the Secretary of State
 
893.00/10–3144
 
[Document 478]
 
The Ambassador in China
 (
Gauss
) 
to the Secretary of State 
 
 
 
No. 3104
 
 
Chungking
, October 30, 1944.
[Received November 11.]
 
 
 
Sir
: Referring to the Embassy’s despatch no. 2991, September 22, 1944, enclosing a draft of the political principles of the Democratic League
48
 (Federation of Democratic Parties), I have the honor to enclose a translation of a set of proposals
49
 prepared by the Democratic League with respect to political administration during the final stage of the war. It is understood that the Democratic League originally proposed to release these proposals for publication, but it appears that the reinstitution by the Government during the last month of a repressive censorship policy has made that impossible. It seems probable, therefore, that the proposals will be disseminated by surreptitious means if at all.
 
 
 
Summary of Proposals
. (1) Readjustment of the armed forces and thorough prosecution of the war; (2) immediate termination of one-party government and the formation of a coalition government composed of all parties and cliques to realize democratic government; (3) adoption of a cordial and friendly foreign policy and the strengthening of relations with Great Britain, the United States, Russia and other Allied nations in order to achieve victory and consolidate world peace; (4) reform of economic and financial organizations and policy in order that the prestige of the Government and country may be maintained and a firm foundation for peace and reconstruction consolidated; and (5) reform of the present educational policy, safeguarding of free development of thought and technical arts, and advancement of the cultural standard of the general public. (Detailed proposals are incorporated in each category for the attainment of the objects desired.) 
End of Summary
.
 
 
The proposals of the Democratic League are similar in many respects to those adopted at the recent session of the People’s Political Council (Embassy’s despatch no. 3048, October 11, 1944). But in one notable respect they go much further than the PPC proposals: namely, the proposal that one-party government be terminated and a coalition government composed of all parties and cliques be established in its stead. Such a proposal was made at the PPC session by a Communist delegate but as a result of Government pressure it was never formally considered. The Democratic League proposals appear to be far more inclusive, integrated, detailed and concrete than those adopted by the PPC.
 
The Democratic League proposals cannot be regarded as other than a severe indictment of the ruling Kuomintang and a demand for its 
relinquishment of exclusive political control. Indeed, these proposals are similar in many respects to those emanating from the Chinese Communists at Yenan; and this factor suggests a spiritual, if not actual, affinity between these two groups which are becoming more and more outspoken in their opposition to the Kuomintang.
 
It may be taken for granted that the Democratic League proposals will prove most unpalatable to the Kuomintang authorities and that the latter will exert every effort to block their dissemination to the masses.
 
Respectfully yours,
 
 
C. E. 
Gauss
 
 
 
48
 
Enclosure not printed.
49
 
Not printed.