China Democratic League Outlawed
Third Largest Political Party Wit
the Thir    g       ical Party With
‘           ~                                             ~

加   4        in    n Mal       League leaders. He: ,said the PPC
Huge    O  O                               Secretary General S!hao Li Tze pro-
mised to investigate this matter,

-    <n ce                            SUSPENSION OF LEAGUE |
hi  Ui          i             7                      Meanwhile a Shan; ghat report says:
i            M AT AY AN   BRANCH                      uae  resident Chang

it} Va    +                            Lan today oi IClapiy  announced taae
ne has ordered the tempovary sus-
;       enakecim:    「    s   in    t     pension of all Demsacratic League ac-
Oct. 29.—A  poke man of the Ministry of the  uvities put declared that eeagaa
the outlawing of the Democratic Lea-  branches abraad might not obey his
th                                                          eects              所            y
rgest party in China with a large member- | ™Structions. :     ie
4   “ak,          ie     bs          Chang said the  Government ban
lly in Malaya—said it had been accused   against the League was a “noose” to
'   s a “Communist satellite.”            force League members into suppori-
1   asa       t                    .   d   ‘me all Gove cninenc policy,
iws and emergency measurds  proclaime     me Said the suoriintang demands
ve acuuviues by Communists behind Na- | haa not oeen presented hurmally or
(   ve as    ee                     ‘ratic | Clcl@uy and that tne League nag not
ere hencetorth applicable to the Democratic | gnswera d,uomintang challenges.
He accused the Kuomintang ot for-
dca            f     :     sing hand ols purportedly uistrivu-
4           tic League headquarters in Shanghai Was Jed by tht: League  demanding tne
.                                  OVertnrow of the uovernment and op-
morning.    7      :     ce                 1     bosiny the mobilization order, te said
esman tid the Unite Press over the tele- | ine Handovs were distributed im Nan-
;     5 in tle newspapers but the govern- | king theaters.
‘pies otiliea che League,                     AWALLING NEXT GOVT. MOVE
th Interior Chang Li Shen told the United   Democratic League membery went
M         ; i Nanking that he was not planning to out~ | about «ier vusiness as usual yesterday
s     -h he said the individuals  had been | ‘®*y awanea tne next 人
tnough he sale     ‘      :    amet   nd | Meve totiowing tne oiticiat outlawing
;    vw secretly with the  Communist cause a    ov their varty—Cnina’s tnird largese
us       4. A government spokesman insisted to the  aller the Kuomintang ana the Com-
‘     = would be no mass” arrests but action  muiuist—on a charge of conducting
here wou    3       ie   .      *       ic    ero-Communist activities, says a
aos       ‘    %         >       nis   !                   vee
inst individuals implicated in the Communist  neuter report irom Shangnai.
he government),                      > ir. Sere    =.
a              rment  SpoKes-
       mmunist bandit,’
oe        ‘and local autho-
ol           nation have been
om  了    measures against
WARNING TO_
COMMUNES!  AGENTS
+ vill pe recalled that last week the
“a 圖 |  » Nanking called uUpod
| ‘ommunis' agents in Nanking to
tr with the police and warned
et thoce net registering would be
oor rounded up and punished severe-
 with death or ing sentences.
ea p    ‘ont spokesman did not
+ whet      as specifically refer-
. the Democratic League but
om         were immediately
a    ayveiiilance similar to
sures aginst the Communists be-
hev were tlown to Yenan follow-
.the failure of the Marshall peace
‘The Gov        ss long tConsil:e-
ed the Der   tic League as closely
following the Communist in argu-
nis during the peace negotiations,
nd in   tine the National Assem-
l December and retusing to par-
Ndpate in the coalition government.
A nu   r of Democratic League  lea-
rs have been assassinated in remote
parts of the country and Democratic
Leagu    vers in Nanking are in-
|       offi   Central News
\     cd a lengthy story char-
ming he D    atic League as a toc!
“@ Communists but no action yas
then, though veiled reports of
ties against the Lea-
       stern China reached the
   |  rue immediately is-
i    . ot the charges,
LEAGUE INHERITS
‘OMMUNIST [ROPERTIES
加, nen the ‘ommunists departed for
vial Ttst Spring (the League took
“fT mest ot the Communist proper-
‘ts —houses  furnitures,  cars—with
vosernment consent, and are now liv-
“sin the former Communist head-
ar ers in Shanghai formerly occi-
on De: chiet (ommunist negotiator
hai, En Lai » hen ¢ Ou Was Jn Shaneg-
pi League is headed  by Huen,z
人 ati       vestknown leaders
ii Univer-
anh     “ols spokesman, who
““empted to mediate
7  “eels DUS Ineurred QGe-
“Aarsnalls ire heeausa he re.
|   ron  UN}   of confidential
0 Individual Action
Against  League
Members
ion tle lovernment  Informa~
th Cited P Hollington  Tong told
iy   "ess Yesterday that the
tai, tat would not take acti
Scalnst individu:        7 ‧   —
Members » “4 ” Democratic League
ln iy ,。 “Chce of their participa-
(a  d ‘UM MuUnIst conspiracy.
14    4e on Lo Lung Chi’s ap-
trial i,    investigation and
~* <*s court, Tong said Lea-
a DOT
eue members accused of conspiracy
woula be tricd in an open civilian
coure.

(l.o said such trials would be mili-
lary).

Tong said that Lo is “a free man”,
Was in no personal danger and was
not restricted in his :wovements,.

Reyarding Lo’s house arrest earlier
yesterday long said it was a “*tempo-
pary police action”. He claimed that no
League members were presently un-
utr arrest nor would any be arrested
merely tor holding League member-
ship provided they observed the Goy-
ermient decree outlawing the Lea-
gue,
| ‘Tong claimed that the League was
-cutlawed beeause the Government
possessed “‘concrete evidence” of the
ieague’s «co-operation with Commu-
nists and because the League refused
to accept the constitution.

若
_L0 Lung Chi May Ask
Ameri         ass
merican Embassy
Kor Refuge

Lo Lung Chi, Democratic League
spokesman, at an impromptu press
conference yesterday said he felt that
he was in personal danger and de-
bating whether to ask the American
embassy for refuge.

Lo appealed to the “justice of the
 world” against what he said were un-
founded charges outlawing the poli-
tical party as communist agents.

Lo said he had advised members of
the League to “sit tight’ pending ins-
tructions from President Chang Lan.

An embassy spokesman, asked whe-
ther Lo, in fact, was already receiv-
ing refuge at the embassy. replied
| ““Emphatically not,” and also stress-
ed that Los was not authorised to meat
| the press at the embassy, although
that was what he was doing.

Lo came to the embassy to inform
American officials of the action taken
}against the League by the Chinese
Government.

Asked what would be the embassy’s
position if Lo appealed for refuge,
the spokesman said: “We will meet
that problem when it arises.” He em-
phasized that refuge is granted nor-
, mally only in cases where “imminent
idanger of death” exists. He recalled
that the American consulate in Kun-
ming gave refuge last year to League
members following the assassination
of several League members.

GOVT. ASKED TO GIVE TIME
to give the Democratic League time
to wind up its affairs and said the
Government’s outlawing of the League
came as a complete surprise to the
20,000 League members.

Lo said he had written to the Ge-
neralissimo and to the Premier ear-
lier this month denying that the Lea-
gue had co-operated with the Com-
munists and asking publication of the
Government charges. Both remain
unanswered, he said,

He claimed that the men mention?d
by the Ministry spokesman were not
League members, whereas the League
oppose illegal activities, has never
participated in armed rebellion, and
“does not even possess a pistol.”

He said the secret service prevent-
ed his going to Shanghai to consult
ae
League leaders.  He: said the PPC
Secretary General Slhao Li Tze pro-
mised to investigate thi. matter.
SUSPENSION OF LHAGUE
ACTIVITIES, IN SHANGHAI
Meanwhile a Shan; zhail report says:
mn teen nee resident Chany
Lan today o IGlaply  announced thac
ne has ordered the tempocary sus-
pension of all Demsacratic League ac-
tivities wut declared that  Leagua
branches abr@ad might not obey his
mstructions.      3
Cnang said the Government ban
against the League was a “noose” +o
force League members into suppor:-
is all Governinenc puiicy,
me Said the nuoriintang demands
had not pe en presented lurmaliy ov
ViliCially and that tne League nag not
answered J .uomintany challenges.
He accus ed the Kuomintang ot for-
6'ng hand oils purportedly ulstrivu-
tea by thet,  Leupue  demanding the
UVertnrow of the Government anu Up-
POSINy thea mobilization order, te said
‘ne handodjlis were distributed in Nan-
King theaters,
AWATLING NEXT GOVT. MOVE
Democratic Laague members went
about Gieir business as usual yesterday
‘ney a@wdiued the next Governmenc
move totiowing tne ollueial outlawing
oO. their Varty—China’s tnird largest
uller tne Kuomintang and the Com-
liuiuist—on a charge ui conducting
pro-Communist activities, says a
aveuter report irom Shangnai.      }
Up till last evening the Shanghai
heaaquarters of the League were stiil
j;lunchoning and no League members
had been molested in any way but-
Tears of a mass roundup of Leavue
members in China were expressed by
| League circles.
Huang Yen-pei, one of the toplevel
leaders of the Party. left for Nanking
| immediately the ban became known.
lt is.stated he will attempt to inter-
view Government leaders  seekiny
Clarification of the Government action.
|    in announcing the outlawing of the
League, a spokesman of the Ministry
[ot the Interior reeled off a long list
of charges against the Party includ-
ing support of the Communist rebel-
‘| lon and instigation of student and
| labour disturbances in Shanghai and
‘| other parts of the country.
|   Witn both the Democratic  League
and the Communist Party now banned,
there ere only two political groups in
China, aside from the all-powerfal
Kuomintang. These are the Young
China and the Democratic Sociatist
parties—the latter an offshoot of the
Democratic League—both of which
form part of the present three-parcy
| coalition government.
|    The Ministry of the Interior spokes-
.| man in his statement issued at Nan-
king yesterday morning, said the Mi-
| nistry was impelled to take action
because’ the Democratic  League had
| been playing the part of Communist ‘1
| accomplice both in the front and rear!
against the security of the state.
Among the charges he quoted as
‘| proof of the League’s “conspiracy
|} with the Communists to overthrow
the Central Government” was the
“open denunciation of Government’s
| general mobilization order by the Lea-
| gue’s Hongkong and Singapore bran-
., ches.”—UP.  and Reuter.
-UP.
and
Reuter.