THE MASTER MIND
WE eannot restrain a sneaking regard tor the

bureaucratic master mind (or master
minds) who drafted the official  statement
withdrawing exemption from  registration
from the Kuomintang and the China Demo-
cratic League. It is a reminder thar, the Sin-
gapore Government has not been corrupted
by the current iashion among  governments
to say what they mean in language  direct,
brief and brutal. It can still hand’e n a
masterly fashion the language of the old dip-
lomacy which coated the most bitter pill with
a sugar of diverting logic, affirmations and pro-
testations. Only after the victim has savour-
ed the pill long enough is he aware that all is not _
well.                                        7

The new ruling on foreign political parties

appears, at first sight, to put legal obstacles,

“by no means insurmountable, in the way
of the K.M.T. and the C.D.L. Action is being
taken to delete the names of foreign organi-
sations from those gazetted as political par-
ties. If these parties wish to maintain bran-
ches they will have to apply for registration
or exemption from registration.

This last statement offers the hope that
these two alien parties can still function in
Malaya.

*
BUT a more careful study of the statement
shows that such hopes are illusory   The
statement in fact amounts to a ban on the
K.M.T. and the C.D.L. The word “ban” is
not used in the announcemént but it is, never-
theless, implied.

If the parties apply for registration o1
exemption “such applications......wouid be
considered on their merits.”

But the Government is of the opinion that
foreign political associations are obstacles “to
the development of a Singapore political con-
sciousness.” This being so, no foreign politi-
cal organisation can be considered a good
thing.

The statement contains a significant but
ominous sentence. “But even if registration
were not permitted......”

The strong nint behind this sentence will
not be lost on those who have entered into the
spirit of the whole statement. The “even if”
when savoured iong enough, would make clear
that what the Government intended tc say
was: “Registration is possible but highly im-
probable.”

The K.M.T. and .the C.D.L. may be for-
given if they did not at first know what hit
them or that they had been hit at all.

However, though we are impressed by the
Government’s dexterity, we still think that it
would have been wiser to have stated it- rea-
sons frankly and plainly.

*       自
QHE argument that the K.M.T. and the C.D.L.

. are beirig banned because they are stumb-
ling blocks to Singapore’s political progress,
though true to a certain extent, is not con-
vincing. Why has the Government proceed-
ed against these two parties at a time when
political events in China are taking a turn
for the worse?

_ Obviously the Government is aware that poli-
tical developments in China will have repercus-
sions in this country, and they may not all be to
the good. The Communists could use political
organisations as instruments for infiltration tac-
tics and for spreading their propaganda.

__If the Government has any fears on this score

  it should tell the people about them. If it feels
that the people are not worthy of being taken
into its confidence then—God help us!