Dynamiting The Bridge
The outlawing of the  Chinese Democraitlc
League serves to underline the fact that the Nan-
king Government has decided to fight the Reds to
a finish. Until now the existence  of the Demo-
cratic League as a bridge between the Reds and
the Nationalists had kept alive the hope that a rap~
prochment could still be arrived at between the
Right and Left in China.   Bui since the civil war
began the Democratic League bridge has been fall-
ing into a state of disrepair and its usefulness had
become negligible. It was, as it were, in a state
of suspended animation.

The hopes entertained in many quarters, both
inside and outside China. that the Democratic League
would be the spearhead of a liberal ideology incor-
porating what is best in «he ideologies of the extreme
Right and Left have now been dashed to the ground.
In the past few months the Right has become More
Conservative and has learnt to dread even the inno-
cous radicalism of the Democratic League.  Today
the average Chinese has to make a choice between
supporting the extreme Right or the extreme Left.
Not only the Chinese but also countries like America
and Russia are confronted with the same choice.

Many Americans saw in the emergence of the

六   Democratic League a hopeful solution for the para-
i.   dox that confronted them in China. By supporting
Fy  the Democratic League the Americans wOuld have
: been spared the painful choice of supporting wholly
one or the other of the extreme faciions. The poli-
tical and economic ideas of the Democratic League
were sufficiently progressive to go down well among
American democrats. and moderate enough to allay

the suspicions of “Red-fearing” Americans.

However it is a little ironical to think ‘hat re-
cent American policy in China has contributed not
a little towards the disintegration of the Demo-
cratic League. The more that America lent i‘s sup-
port to the Nationalists against the Communisis
the more superfluous became the role of the Demo-
cratic League as a “‘mediator’’.