Reed thas y 


Starved Nerves 


“ Acack of Nerves” ix usually due co an 
A insufficiency of chose special food elements 
wm the dict on which the nervous system depends for 
nourishment. Thisisoncimportant reason for making 
delicious ‘ Ovaltine’ your regular daily beverage. 


* Ovaltine ' is ascientific concentration of the nourish. 
ment derived from Nature's finest foods — malt, milk 
and cgus. The cgxs provide lecithin (organic 
phosphorus) which is a most valuable clement fos 
building up the nerves. 


Comains Vitamins 4, 


Niterre fren 


OVALTINE 
For Nerve-Strength & Vitality 


A Dispensaries 


4 oieoun, Phesphotnes 


Obainable at all deadiag, Cerpeadares 


JARDINE, MATHESON & CO., LTD. 


HARRIMAN REALTY CO., LTD.. 


REAL ESTATE BROKERS AND VALUERS 
“COME TO US tOR ADVICE” 


ALL TYPES INDUSTRIAL & DOMESTIC PROPERTIES 
AVAILABLE 
3 Connaught Road, Tel: 336(%, Telegrams “Harriman” 


' 


If you hear one urchin yell 
“Faaclat!" at another urchin 
in the ramshackle back-strects 
of Moscow today, you know 
that teripers have been lost. 
The term cf abune is so aerious 
that it is almost obscene. 

If you heard one Germat 
shout “Communiat!* at another 
German unde, the Nazi regime, 
you held ycur breath and fook- 
ed to ace If anyone else had 
noticed. 

The chatze was libellous if 
untrue, punishable with arrest, 
goncentration camp and tortare 
f true. 

The two politien! aystemsa re- 
warg eachother as the ultimate 
abomination. Yet under both 
of them . men’s lives — and 
thoughis onare regimented and 
controlled “fer the good of the 
zommunity.” 

Under both, political 
in imposey where jt ia not ac- 
‘epted: cppoaition is forcibly 
“uppressed; one party holda 
anehallenged power; there is no 
freedom of apeech or the Press; 
there are. no guarantecs against 
arbitrary  impriscnment, — tor- 
ture, or death; there ia increns- 
ing fear of the secre: police. 

The practical almilarities of 
the two systems seem great 
noush to outweigh oany con- 
ceivable differences. What are 
the differences which enable 
Fascists to regard Communists 
ux incarnate devila and vice- 
versa? 


theory 


Two Groups 


If you comb carefully through 

the jumble cf contemporary 
history in search of the answer. 
ou Will almost) er ctainly end 
up with two main groups of 
difference—-or apparent difer- 
ence: : 
1. The difference of origin— 
he Left-Wingneas of Commun- 
ism ang = -Right-Wingness of 
Fascism; 

2. The difference of scope— 
the narrow nationalism of Fas- 
cism, the brond — international- 
ium of Communism. 

The difference cf origin is 
important because it gives both 
partics their battle-cry, , It ex- 


plains why the Communists nen) 


THE CHINA MAIL, WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER a, 1947. . 


| WHERE DOES COMMUNISM | 
JEND AND FASCISM BEGIN? 


curse Fasclam of being the last} 
desperate refuge of Capitalism 
—the final reinforcement of the 
rich in thelr explcitation of the 
poor. .- 
And it explains why the Fas- 
clats imagine themselves as 
gerusndera fighting off no din- 
bolien] thrent to the most 
cherished valuea of mankind, 
Communiam, so far, haa come 
to power cither through a bril- 
liontly Jed Left-Wing revolution 
‘os in Rusain) or else through 
use or nbuse of the normal pro- 
cesper of parlinmentary demc- 
cravy tas in the Tron Curtain 
courtrics). 


Fear-Inspired 


Snacism, so far, has been o 
fcav-inspireg reaction to the 
ren! or fancied threat of Com- 
muniam, revolution, and chaos, 

lt in born when' a sufficiently 
powerful group of men begin to 
feel that democracy fs too gentle 
and tolerant to meet the threat 
—that strong and ruthless mea- 
sures are necessary. 

Communism has captured the 
most extreme Left-Wing-. poli- 
tical position avatlable. Noth- 
ing could be Lefter. Therefore, 
it is supporteg by the poorest, 
neediest, bitterest and moat un- 
successful members of the po- 
pulation. 

Fascism, as oan insurance 
against Communism, inevitably 
stands a little farther to the 
Right. It is supported by those 
who foresce chaos and disaster 
in rule by the poorest and most 
unauceesaful ; supported, in 
fact, by the richer and more 
successful—by the people who 
have more to lore, 

So, in theory, Communism is 
liable to be dictatorship by the 
Left-hand half of the country, 
and Fasclam dictatorship by 
the Right-hand half. But the 
ingredient of totalitarianism is 
common to both, 


Same Formula 


Anq that js what gives the 
strongest flavour to the life of 
the country. It reduces both 
systems to variations of the 
same form of government. And 


AT LAST DECALS FOR THE FAR EAST 


You Can Now pats Mark Your’ Products. 


if spud . .< 
prpantnin OF acnicurly - 5 


PALM BROTHERS 


“SLIDE-OFF DECALS GUA 


RANTEE 


THE DISTINCTIVE IDENTIFICATION 
THAT SELLS YOUR PRODUCT 


Whotever you manufocture of distribvie, Siide-offs 
will meet your requirements for nomeplctes, trode: 
morkh, operating instruction, ond ony other infor- 
mation to be ploced on the finished product. 


The odvontoges of Polm Brothers Slide-offs are 


mony: 


DESIGN: Made in any size or shope, in 
ony color or combination of colon. 


APPLICATION: Ecsily opplied to any 
commercial surface, including giqss, metol, 
wood, or plastic. Present no production 
problem. 


COST: The most economical 


meons of 


Permanently morking your prodvct. 
DURABILITY: Mode to weor, even under 


exacting conditions. 


Note the versatility of Slide-offs os ilvsiroted in this 


folden nameplates ond trade-marks for 


on extensive 


“list of merchondise from heavy machine tools to 
delichte, commeticy, directions, diogroms, operoting 
Srrnens fer 0 ae of erence, oe ee 


trical dems. 


ve Whatever yout product, mote yow 
Potm Brothers Siide-cff Decals. a 


‘Wee lor complete wlormation ond 
, e . 


| MAKERS OF. THE FAMOUS PAUMLAC OBCALS,.. 


ino sth 


qeotations. 


+ | WINDOW BIGNS, VALANCES,: POINT-OF-SALE 
‘ ADVISED AND TRUK DECALS 


* REGENT, sPencen end Lexmecton avowets | 


+ concrnatt 2 Gmo_ 


K LTD. ie 
TBLEPHONE: 1880 


‘ammunition 


.] power tools and 


just na oall religious fanutics 
hate heretica worse than in- 
Adela, no Ccmmuniam hates 
Fascism with an especially bit- 
.er hatred. 

The difference’ of sacope—nn- 
Honnlism versus international. 
lam—ia of for greater impor. 
tance. . 

Fasciam. in all the examples 
so far available, is a national 
inlie erced, thriving on crude, 
narrow patriotism. 

"As a reaction against the 
world-religion of Communism 
it ix bound to put excessive em- 


THE SECOND OF 
TWO ARTICLES BY 


Alexander 


Clifford 


phasia on nationalism. Scon 
it builds up a shallow, jingoia- 
tic mythology, 9 counter. 
myasticiam tc Communism. 

It glorifies the Army as the 
natural symbol of national 
airength. It begina to-aim at 
economic — self-sufficiency. It 
explcits and exaggerates grie- 
vances against other natfons. 
ti walls itself in with ta creed. 

Its philosophy Ia never one 
that can be exported. It may 
find admirers abrony wh: 
dream of producing the same 
thing in) their own countries, 
But, it can never spread its ex- 
act creed, for its creeg is ca- 
rentlally confined to the chosen 
race, 


- An Army 


When Faacism goes abroad, 
it goes ns an army, enslaving 
the bodies, not the minds, of 
men, 

But Communism was conceiv- 
ed as a worlg syatem, It claim: 
to be a universal faith, ap- 
plicable to all mankind. Ite 
original theory rejected nation 
alism as primitive -tribalism 
inevitably: leading to war. It 
first prophets were not Russian: 
at all, but Germanr. : 

Like all religions it spreads 
by conversion. Its. philosophy 
is far profounder than any Fas- 
cism, and far mere attractive 
to the poor and unsatisfied. It 
offers itself as the political, 
economic and spiritual remedy 
for the entire globe: 

Unhappily for the theory, So- 


viet Ruasia’s history has forced , 


her into nationalism. Things 


reoe 


A Dire Threat | 


Havana, Dec. 29. 

China today announced 
that it would seek to use 
Chinese as a working Inn- 
guage should Spanish be © 
added to English and 
French in deliberations In 
the United Nations Trade 
and Employment § confer- 

_ enco—United Press, 


Arms 


Factory 


For China 


Ottawa, Dec. 29. 
Equipment for a small arms 
factory has bocn 
shipped from Canoda to Chinn as 
part of the US$10,000,00¢ deal 
by China for Canndian military 
squipment, the Canadian Press 

id today. 

Previously it was disclosed that 
bo uito fighter bombers, am- 
tlon for these aircraft. and 
landing und equipment were 
include {n the arrangement, 
which developed {rom the 1045 
mutual ald ogreement. This 
equipment for making small arms 
ammunition ieludes machine 
tools of various kinds, scme 

When bled," the - tact 

assembled,: the cto: 
will be able’ to produce 303 call 
bre ammunition, jised principally 
t:day in.the British -Loo Enfleld 
rife “ond in ‘certain . medium 
machine-guns, and “.nino . millt- 


ae metre g cattridges., which are used 


s-and certain’ outoma- 
tte “Pistols sassoeiated Press, 


- SOVIET. RENEWS 
RADIO ATTACKS 


Seoul, Dec, 29. 
"Aster g month of comparative 
silence the Soviet controlled 
North Korean radio at Pyong- 
yang has begun an anti-American 
campaign: unprecedented 
history of the occupation: 
-_ The commentatcr sald that the 
Greek, Indonesian and Kerean 
commissions were ait formed b . 


dana 


in the} 


did not turn ou’ quite na Marx 
predicted, Ruasia found her- 
self the solitary Communist 
country in no. hostile world. 


She could net be international 
in the circumstances, On the 
contrary, she was forced/ to 
build up a atanding army—a 
thing which all the Communist 
prophets’ had bitterly denoun- 
ced. And then she had to fight 
a war,’ which is the ultimate 
esaence of nationalism. 


Russia's Creed 


Circumstances have forced 
Ruasin to behave much. more 
ke o 'Farcist country than o 
Someuiniat/ ene, But internn- 
Honalinm fa stil, her official 
creed. 

Within the U.S.S.R. there are 
dozens of nationa living together 
in real cr enforced amity (at 
any rate, no ware between them 
are possible). 

The Iron-Curtain countries 
are virtually part of the Rus- 
sian Commonwealth. Their 
trade will be interlecked with 
Ruania’s and they will have no 
need of armies vis-o-via cach 
othe; or Russia; Moscow will 
keep the pence. 

And the Communist particr 
abrond are missionary bodies 
whose lenders . ‘feel greater 
loyalty to Communism 
they do to their own countries, 

So Communiam, on paper, at 
‘enst, alms at world peace on 
the basis of al) men eubscrib- 
ing to np common syatem and be- 
Vef. Fasefem ean only nim at 
world pence on the basis of one 
nation dominating the entire 
werld, 

Fascism of the type that has 
so'far appeared can, in fact, 
lead only to n network of selfish 
and - rampant nationalisms 
which ultimately must reault in 
war. ; 


The Question 


The question now before the 
world is: Wil Russia be con- 
tent with trying to convert the 
world, or will she try 
to dominate it? Will she be- 
have like a Communiat State or 
ao Fascist State? 

She will certainly go on 
callings herself a Communist 
State... And will that provoke 
America into a Fascist reaction 
(called, of course, “Anti-Fas- 
cism”), with the forcible sup- 
pression of Communism and the 
‘Athronement of a mystical 
“American way of life’ and all 
the rest of the familiar clap- 
trap? 

Or can true democracy pre- 
yall? 


Thrilling 
Alaska Air 


Rescues 


New York, Fee. 29. 

Ploncs and log teams were 
standing by ut Nome, Alaska, 
today awalting a breok in a 40 
miles per hour blizzard, which 1s 
sweeping the area, so that they 
could set out to rescue airmen 
frcm two crashed planes and a 
gilder stranded in frozen wnhste- 
land more than’ 100 miles away. 


One of the stranded plancs—a 
Dakota—towing a glider, was 
{creed down through engine trou4 
ble while aearing the spot where 
four survivcrs of a Superfortress. 
that crashed Iast Tucsday after 
an Arctle flight, were awaiting 
rescue, ° 


Five of the Dakota's crew—all 
of whom were unhurt—were pick- 
ed up by another rescue plane |- 
fitted with skis and flown back to 
Nome, while others etayed behind 
to prepare the slider for a pick- 
up. 


“Later, 

Six half-frozen survivors of 
the B-29 crash in .the desolate 
Arctic. wastelands: wore rescued 
today by daring Alaskan bush 
pilots, and two: other crewmen 
who left the bomber for aid-are 
-being sought near. the twisted 
wreckage. « *, 


- Plot Bill Munz.: “landed at 
Nome with four crash’ survivors 
within © an’ -hour’ ‘Frank, 
Whaloy, veteran bush flyer, 
brought two more’ 
from the icy ‘slopes: of the un- 
charted mountain, -100 miles 
north of Nomo, where the big 


Superfortress crashed on Tucs- 


day. 


All six men are suffering 
from exposure after seven days 
in sub-zero weather in.a- howl- 
ing bilzzard. — 
took off imnicdiately Into the 


| Arctic twilight to hunt for, the 


remaining two crow rs of 
the’ plane, who. were believed to 
‘have left the wreckage in search 
ee |g naan and 


survivors | .. 


Both bush pilots |- 


HAPPY NEW. YEAR 


CAFE de LUXE 


Mezzanine Floor 
(China Emporium, Ltd.) 
Tel. 26428 


SPECIAL DINNER -——- 
NEW YEAR'S EVE 
NEW YEAR’S DAY 


EXCELLENT SERVICE. 


FOR RESERVATIONS PLEASE PHONE EARLY! 


than | / 


GRAND OPENING TO-MORROW 
PLEASE NOTE THE SPECIAL TEMES: 


QUEEN’S 


5 Shows on New Year's Day 


11.30 A.M.; 2.30; 
5.00: 7.20 & 
9.40 P.M. 


GARY COOPER 


ag Winte Hat. the pambler 


I NGRID Bt i 


as lus Cho of New Orleans 


SARATOGA 


EDNA FERBER'S 


STORY OF STORIES - 


ALHAMBRA 


AT 2.30; 5.00; 


7.15 & 9.30 P.M. 


TH 


THE EERE Niwsmacaziie: 


Thee 


AT ALL. ‘BOOKSELLERS 


eae 


Distetbutors : 


THE weNérareR ENTERPRISE, 


BRAATHENS ~~ 
SOUTH AMERICAN FAR EAST AIRTRANSPORT A'S 


SAFE. 


Laxupioos” SKYMASTER” Pour Excuniap Pranes NORWAY-BUROPB CHONG KOHG, 


LHONGKONG-LONDON 


via AMSTERDAM 


“BOOKINGS ACCEPTED FOR ANY EUROPEAN DESTINATION 
NO PRIORITIES REQUIRED 


EXPECTED DEPARTURES FROM HONGRONG: 
5th January * 
18th January * 
4th February 
21st February 
+ ACCEPTING PASSENGERS & FREIGHT FOR TEHERAN 


Por Pasuge & Brent boukings Apps toc— 


WALLEM & CO. 


Agents: 
tuongkunk 6 Shanghai Bank Bultding, Tels: 34177-b 
chinese Freight Agents. tin tan & CQ, Tel. 2340 


~CHEONG MING MATCH 


FOOK LEE HONG— 


415, OES VOEUX ROAD, WEST, Isr FLOOR. 
TEL, 33076 28559 


« CHOICE IMPORTED AND 
DOMESTIC TGBACCOS 


© VACUUM CLEANTD 
* FIRMLY ROLLED 
@ MODERN PXICE 


A RICHER SMOOTHER SMOKE 


rorists, who flun 
ed Damascus Ga 


a 


before the ex 


New Prize 
For War 
Museum 


London, Dec. 2. 

A shell of the Sehwere 
Gustav, I, said to be the 
largest gun in the worid. 
built by Krupps, has ar- 
rived in the Imperial 
War Museum. 

Deatgned = under 
name of Dorn 
1937, the gun welghed 1,600 
tons, 1 had a very Jong barrel 
—mnade in ewo parts and serew- 
ed together in the middia—and 
wan capable of firing a seven 
and a half ton shell up to a 
range of 28 miles. The calibre 
was 31.496 Inches, 

Schwere Gustav To was used 
in the siege of Sevastopol from 
1941 te 1942, and a accond gun 
was built for use against Lenin- 
xrad, The gun, emplaced on 
railway tracka, Was served by 
1,600 men commanded by i 
Major-General + 
| At one time, plans were mie 
to fire acroys the Stralts of 
Dover at London, using a rocket 
propellant in the base of the 
shell. These were later aban- 
duned.—Reuter, 


Bonus Battle In 
Shanghai 


Shanghai, Dec. 30. ” 


The Burenu of Social Affairs’ 
year-end bonus commiitee today 


the — code 


ar the end of 


ruled that all year-end gratui-| 


ties, which in principle should 
he one month's salary, be paid 
before January 16th. : 

However, 23 Jabour-manage- 
ment disputes have already been 
repcrted in connection with the 
henuses. In some caver — the 
workers demanded more — than 
one month's wages, while in 
alhers the management sought 
permission to make a smaller 
payment due to the  buainess 
slump. ithe 

The British-owned Yeetsoong 
Tcbnceo Company workers (Bri-+ 
tish American Tobacco Com- 
pany) staged un “go alow" strike 
in a dispute over. the mode of 
payment although the mannge- 
ment agreed to one month's 
“wapes, 

The workers demanded pay- 
ment befere January 15th while 
the Company suggested that the 
final payment be made before 
February 6th.—United Press. 


British Tin For. 
Russia 


A Board of Trade spokesman said 
today that Britain will start de- 
liverles of tin to Russia under the 
new trade pact aa soon as details 
have been worked out with the 
Rusian-buying agencies in Britain. 

Moscow Radio said earlier that 
Runsia will send ‘eltain 750,000 


|. ons of coarse grains Instead of the 


"$00,000 tons of animal {feedstuffs 
teviously reported. ‘ 
The British spokesman said he 
‘id fot know whether the shipments 
vould be from stockpiles In, Britain 
ot from Malaya, which produces the 
vorld’s highest grade ‘ore.. He .said 
alky on the shipments will begin in 

“he near futureAssoclated Press. 


THE CHINA MAIL, WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER si, 1947., 


ARABS ON THE RAMPAGE | 


Seek Vengeance For Damascus G 
British Police Among 
The Casualties 


powerful 


The bodies of the dead and — ine 
iured Jay among scattered oranges. 
The Government, Uorpital reported 
two more Arab dea ts to the nine 
afficially reported, and at beast 37 in- 
istred, 

Within ten minutes of the explosion 
Irguon Zeai Leumi, Jewish terrorist 
organisation, — telephoned Hebrew 
journalists and claimed reaponsibility, 
saying the Damascus Gate was 2 
“meeing place for Arab gangsters.” 

Most of hé castaltios—which were 
known to include Arab women and 
children—occurred among the crowd 
ata bus stop ocar an Arab cafe, 

A cnrload of armed Arabs rushed 
through the Ohl City in) purauit: af 
1 Jewish ¢axt, which wae trying to 
escape into the Jewish quarter. 


Vengeance 


When the ttxi's escape bad been 
blocked, the Araba shot dead the two 
Jewish occupants and then set fire to 
the taxi, 

One other British constable was 
wounded at the Damascus Gate, and 
another was abot dead by unknown 
guninen—believed to be Arabs—in a 
gunfight near the Avtrian Hospital, 
ako in the Old City, 

Dr. C, Malouf, an Arab physician 
in charge of the Mental Hospital at 
Bethlehem, was shot dead today on 
the raad to Bethlehem, Arab sources 
claimed that he wan killed by Jews 
an a reprival fos the murder yester- 
day of a Jewish doctur near the Gove 
croment Isolation Hospital  outid: 
Jerusalem, 

One British soldier was killed and 
two were wounded when armed men 
wearing battle dres« and atecl helmets 
attacked an armoury cast of Jotfa, 

The bandits stole 74 rifles, 3,000 
rounds of ammuoition, and a number 
of Sten guns and pistols, 


Mobilisation Fund 


The Jewish Agency's’ mobilisation 
fund daunched last month with oo 
target of £500,000 ‘for “security” 
purpores, will reach £600,000 — by 
December 31, 9 Jewish = Agency 
spokesman said today. ; 

Similar security funds were now 
being launched in South Africa and 
the United States with unlimited ceil- 
ings, the spokesman added.—Reuier, 


erusalem, Dec. 29. 


Infuriated ‘Arabs stormed through the streets of Jerusalem's Old City to- 
day in search.of Jews to avenbe the nine Arabs killed by 
omb from a speeding 

1) orange market. 
Two British constables were killed—one when ter- 
rorists sprayed the area with machinegun fire 
losion, and one when a-group of . 
Arabs opened fire afterwards. 


Irgun ter- 
car into the crowd- 


Helicopter | 
Crash 


-Naples, Dec. 30. 

Three American Navy 
men were killea® today 
when a hellcopter from, the 
nircraft. carrier Midway 
lost its rotor and fell into a 
serap fron dump in the 
port of Naples. 


The rotor fell in several 
Pleces from a considerable 
altitade, Then the ship 
erashed,—Assoclated Press. 


Iraq Cancels 
Army Leave 


4 Baghdad, Dee. 29. 
Iraq today cancelled all leave for 
army officers, doctors and nurses, it 
was officially Icarned. 

‘The Palestine Defence Committer 
said that yoluntcers had been leav- 
ing the capital for undirclaved des- 
tinations during, the past three days, 

Among the volumects examined by 
doctors in Baghiad mosques during 
the past 24 hours were  ex-vervice- 
men, tribesmen ‘and students,—Reuter. 


Jews Split Over |< 


ate Incident 


Mustangs 


Crash In 
Mid-Air _ 


Kure, Dec. 30. 
Headquarters of the 
31st Australian Fighter 
Wing announced that 
two American pilots of 
the Fifth Air Force 
were killed on Sunday 
morning when 
Mustangs collided in 
mid-air over Bofu air- 
field. 


‘The names are being with- 
hed pending notification to the 
next of kin. 


ye-witnessen sniq the two 
planes, which were on their 
way bnek to their base In 
Northern Kyuahu, were flying 
ever Bofu at about 1,000 feet 
noo farewell anlute when the 
nircraft touched each other. 


One plane crashed into the 
hiltaide out of control while the 
other spiralled into the sea o 
few hundred yarda from the 
coast. : 


Rescue parties recovereq the 
bodies of both  fliera.—United 


Communism 


Jerusalem, Dec. 29.’ 


The Jewish Agency for Palestine has apparently 


fz) 


lit on the issue of Communism as 17,040 new 
legal immigrants have sailed for Palestine 


from behind the iron curtain. 


The split is indicated, informen 
observers state, by the resignation of 
Moshe Snch, head of the Agency's 
European olfice on Sunday in 
Protest against Anglo-American 
orientation of the Agency's foreign 
policy, 


Ie was reported that he favoured 
closer couperation with Russia and 
the Communist-dominated — Balkan 


Kite-Flying For. 


‘Spain? 


Washington, Dec, 29. _ 


There was no reason why Spain should not be- 


come a 
tative c 
not confirm London 


the Foreign Ministers of France, Britain 


artner in the Marshall plan, authori- 
les sald here today, but they could 


newspaper reports that 
and 


the United States had agreed in London to in- 


clude her. 

+ They said that Spain would 
first have to be accepted by the 
16 nations which took part in the 
Paorls Conference for European 
recovery and would have to giv 
assurances cf. her determination 
to join the cooperative effort. 

The opinion here was that the 
more states with bona fide objec. 
tlyes that gue be breught into 
the Europehn recovery plon the 
better the ¢hances the plan had 
of success, 

Jt was conceded that Spain had 
something to contribute as well os 
to gain from a.stable European 
economy. 


“MARSHALL PLAN | 


WARNING: . 


. o", Washtagton, Deo, 29. 
* An ‘Administration’ source said “te: 
fay that if the European — recovers 

programme: fails: ge Is rejected © bt 
Congress and | Europe yore toeth 

Communists, the Unitert States nay. 
have t@ spend oe much-as $20,060, 

100,000 a year on defence, 

The recovery: proaramme, entail: 
tng $17,000,000,000 for 16 Europea: 
cwunteley, ia worth trying asf 
Hcaper way out even though results 
cannot be guaranteed. . 

‘Aa. the Adminteration's view, . 
drastic reduction’ of ‘the four-year 
pragrarome Congres» ‘ultimately 
would require, a longer. progtarame 
rope’ back on ita fest, Yt 

hat chances of, sutcen 

the “aimount of ", 

fhowlarly hontbé iret 'year | 


et 


It was unlikely’ that political 
relations between Spain and mos” 
of the outside world, being what 
they are, that any special induce 
ment would be offered Spain to 
epare jn the European recovery 
plan, . 


- On the other hand, it was felt 
that Spain subscribed to a poll- 
tleal philzsophy no more objrc- 
tlonable to the United States than 
those of one or two other Middle 
European states which the United 
States had indicated it would 
welc:me as participants in the 
recovery plan. 


Governments and = opposed the 
Agency's acceptance of the partition 
of Palestine, 


Sneb’s vane was elasely linked to 
the great nsw exodus’ of Jews from 
behind the iron curtain which the 
Jewish | Agency unsuccessfully at: 
tempted to halt afer the United Na- 
tions partition decision — became 
known. 


Reports from fetantul «nid the 
two foracr American finers, Pau 
Crescent and Pan York, presently 
fying the I'anamanian flag, — had 
parsed through the Noxphorus en 
rate fran Romania to the Ho'y 
Land, ‘Vhe reports said’ the “Turkisi 
authorild « who inepectet the - ships 
roportedt there were $1,154 refugees 
aboard the Pan Crescent and $,886 
aboard the Pan York,  ‘Turkieh 
medical officers inspected the ships 
and gave them-perinisslon to proceed. 


Reports from Bucharest said Sneh 
was active in organtsing the exodus 
and the ships sailed fully loaded 
despite orders from Palestine to cans 
cel the voyage. F 


Another Jewish refugre ship, te- 
named “November 29th", the » date 
partition was approved, by the Unit. 
ed Nations, was intercepted near the 
Palestine coast on Sunday: night with 
6$0 persons aboard who were taken 
to Haifa for transshipment to 
Cyprus.—United Pres#. 


London, Dec, 29, 
Serious floods have occurred In 
mid-Wales due to wetkend rain 
and the rivers Severn, Wye, 
Dovey and’ Vyrnwy have over- 
flowed.--Reuter, 


their}. 


4 


7 Ta 
ertands.< 


THE SEASON'S GREETINGS. 
: to the ‘ a 
Travelling Public 
and. 
looks forward to 
a New Year of 
_Faster and more . 
Comfortable. Air 
Service than éver 
before. 


Passenger & freight Booking Agents 
(P. J. LOBO & CO.) 
4 Chater Road, Tel. 31162 & 31400 
Kowloon Office: Tel. 56260 


be 


DON’T WASH 
Baby’s’ Hair Use 


NESTOL 


CURLS & CLEANSES 


. <  Obtainable at all feading 
oy Dispensarics & Stores. 


Sole Agentsi— 
2 IMPERIAL TRADING CO. 
5th floor, King’s Theatre Bada. 
Tel, 28209 


if 


B 2 0 . A ° [ ACROSS the WORLD 
4 ENGINED FLYING BOAT SERVICE 
FROM HONG KONG 


EVERY 
London— for Europe and N. & 8. Amerien Wed. & Sat. 


To 


Catra ) 
Baohretn ) 


K 
aracht ; for Indla and Ceylon 


‘Rangoon—for Barms 
Bangkok—for Slam 
Singapore for Australin 

and New Zealand 


for Middle East and Africa 


” ” 


Mon, Wed. & Sat. 
(direct) Sat. 
(via Bangkok) Mon. 
For farther information and bookings apply to 


JARDINE, MATA=3)V & CO,, LT) 


AIRWAYS DEPARTMENT, 6-8 CHATEH KD. 

' Kowloon: Peninsula HeteL 
- ‘ Tel: 50237 

‘(C.., FREIGHT ENQUIMIES = Tel: 50217 


CONTROL! 
| PRE-DETERMINE YOUR. 
BUSINESS COSTS AND STANDARDS ; 
. /  - BY USING, . . 
VISIBLE RECORD SYarEMS 


Never has the need: for 
- ‘more acute: than, now. 


timely. facts and figures been 


APPLIANCE: == 


OFFICE, 


ry 7 ' 


PORTRAIT... 


| COLOURING 


WE DO IT IN THE HOLLYWOOD WAY 
_ VIVID—ATTRACTIVE—SMART: 


FRANCIS WU'SSTUDIO 
GLOUCESTER ARCADE’ 


t . 
‘ 


° ? 
TYPEWRITERS 
: . OALOULATING MACHINES 
also Anything and Everything 
, for OFFICE MACHINES 
Exceliont Servico =~ 


eae : _. | Hongkong Typewriter Exchange 
___- Price: 20 Cents, ~ . Tel. 21483' 


~AMOY SHIP DISPUTE |Avard For Gallantry) BARREL BOMBS FALL ~ 
: : a Pegs er Major Esmonde Receives | AMONG. ARABS | 
Passengers And Chinese | Tie Miltary Cross | A7 Killed In Struggle At Haifa 
Michael! | Customs Clash Te, bare Nite” thw from a seeding, ee ante i Ae ies 
Leaves | Bio Smuggling 

Rumania seyret bg 


Haifa today. caused “heavy Arab casualties,” according to a police report. 
“Imprisoned” for more than 10 days and 


t vars 


~ 


‘ 


No. 33859. 


to the one which killed 13 Arabs and wound- 
ed more than 30 at the Damascus Gate, Jeru- 
salem, yesterday. An official report said that 
the situation was under control after troops 
and police had been rushed to the spot. 


The “barrel bombs” were said to be similar in type | 
Big Bank 


¥: 


; e The. Arabs then turned on the} He described the rebel wi 
Bucharest, Dec. 30. nights i Hoare the igh Nor Jewish workers employed at the | of Hagana other: who have : 
King Michael, . of wegian Ship, rosper , 46 passengers plant and stabbed many of them | supervised over 98 per cent of e) 
Rumania, abdicated to- are threatening to riot and use violence a cea sedge Jats “oudied Tie pinlexation: arom age é 
° : 0 rn oO ; a 
day. Later the Republic unless the Chinese Customs authorities out 20 Jews killed or wounded | Revictonist as well vs oan f 
of Rumania was formal- of Amoy free the vessel the “China. in the riot. -, 4 {te the “compromising” policy| Rumours of a Intge-scalo 
ly established. Mail” d Nooges regs : An official ahnouncement sald Jof the Agency. ; bank robbery ter Senlenins : 
ail” learned from shipping circles last inter. that 47 persons had been of the city Tate | yesterday. x 
The abdication of the King will night. kitled in the fighting at the ré- Restrictions ‘ were sald to be involved, 
be announced officially to the The "Pp ieee h b detained rs At h finery’, later turned out upon in- | 
Hurmantan people by radio at 6 e rosper as been detaineé m moy Nnar- The dead are 86 Jews and 11 The informant pointed to the| vestigation to be a “staged” 
pm, local time ‘tonight, the bour since December 20 on arrival from Hong Arabs. Sixty-one were injured| recent — restrictive micasurea| 2ffair, according to the 
nounced ran eA Kong and Swatow. The Chinese Customs of whom 14 were Jewa and 47| taken by the Hungarian and] ellee: 


News of King Michacl’s abdiea- 
tlon was mude in the oulward 
transmission of a Bucharest 
Radio Russian broadcast ot 4.30 
pain, GMT, 


however, 

The Radio | announcement auld: | wore ehinpleg. circles told Hagana iain open rovolt against | strong clementa of the Com- Central) after KNocKing Gan 
Michael 1 igned pn tnsGarent eunvditen otter pcnoual es gs ae SEREEEROr rE: — the Jewish authorities in Pules-} munist parties in both countrics conscious the -Bank’s 
In which he abdicat - ; Ss , Major: (Dr.). Patrick: Esmonde. yesterday received the | eammmnncononnnananennonn| have taken the stand that Jews) cashler. 
maninan theane: SpE TAS SL ae Sonweelan Ap ibessador to urvivors Muttaes Cee en dleiavine tercar cDuEaee in establish- muant be {Integrated into the na- gerne oF the alleged robbers 
Royal prerogatives ‘on his awn na, Mr. Ne Aall (who flew] . e ing a Casualty Evacuation Post. across the Rhine in 1045 4 i] tional economic life and have night watenwing : 
Behalf and on behalf of his eee ne oF. one pala Of Kina and successfully evacunting without delay’ many casualties.” lang S ew placed new obstacles in the way When the. Police under 

ce counter-algned by othe * Amoy Dr. Esmonde, ig a brother. |. tleship, “Scharnhorst” — and of any emigration. : Det. Inspector Williamson 


King Michael gave as the reayon 
for his abdication the fact that 
deep political, cconomic and 
social changes have taken place 
in Rumania during the past 
few years which created’ n new 
relationship between the prin- 
cipat factors governing the na- 
tonal life. | 


The unnouncement — continued: 
“In view of the situation there- 
by created, the King canslders 


there discovered a considerable quantity of 
unmanifested cargo (presumably by passen- 


and 


Ber -emugglers) I } 
N$4,000,000,000 on the ship. Payment in cash 


was demanded. 


branch of the Hong Kong and 
Shanghai Banking Corporation, 
was rejected by the Deputy 
Chinese Customs Commissioner 
in Amoy. 

The Norwegian Ambassador 
petsonally assured the Chinese 
Customs , authorities that the 
fing would be paid on condition 
-but reserved: his right to protest 
in‘accordance with the Chincae 


imposed a fine of 


In Manila 


. Manila, Dec.. 30, 

The remaining survivors from 
the “King” ved in Manila 
this . evening, after a journey 
from Calbayog: by sea to Mas- 
bate whence they came.by a 
plane specially chartered by the 
ship's AREMIGS oe 


Mr. and Mra,’ P, BR, Pedersen 


Mra. Pedersen said: “Were It 


of the late ‘Lisutenant-Com- 
mander E; | Eamonde, DSO, 
who’ won the Victoria Cross, 
rosthum:isly, following a 
-Paval action «in the} Straits 
of.,Dover in, 1942. ‘ 


The ‘action resulted .in the 


sinking’ of the ‘German , bai: ° 


a1 


tee aayeag 


King Michael's — abdication was 


sisted on immediate payment} not for the brave crew we would were inade: at ‘ ent: i tine over post-partition policy all and that the wholc 
“Justified — In. thn ) 7éte''inade:at Government: House ‘yesterda post-pa from near starvation conditions a Hi 
’ woul hinder the. reallanion | “ROWE any quallfcations. me be hore.” ving hours! | Morning when the Governor, Sir Alexander Turope, an informed” Towlsh| 2 Austia Inst Summer where} whieh would br dealth with 
on ne development Ru-| 0) t : , presente * p ° ey overflowe e@ camps an - 
: manta's democratisation’: the cle acl of the un-} of-sitting in a semi-submerged , Granthan, ‘py ented insignia to 41 recipients. source disclosed. : spare deaniig: three ard hate by the Bank officials them ee 
Radio announcement added.— Refe : Hichoat, “with waler sup: to The’ ball of Government House| leading officials and . citizena,|  Tids ae oe gry on a cot. ne, amount Invelved::1t: = : 
; Under th crence armpits, they landed in coastalrwas. gaily. . decorated for ‘the} und. their. Indies. * : said, gave fia _0 od or ° “Partial diversion by direct hid crits age yt ease 
HHSnRIdididldidieisaiiains er the command of Cap-| Samar. — occasion, and. Indluded inthe} The Governor in ceremonial | American ship carrying 12,000! goa route was then organised $4 ae 
tain A. 8. Bugge, the “Prosper"| The viilagors immediately a8-|jarge number of. quests present} dress, made the presentation to| Rumanian Jews as illegal im-| by qWacana 000... 
"{plys between the Straits, Hong] sisted with food and dry| yo oc; 5 Se eyare " la er acting | migrant to Palestine to sot sail) 7.408 
AIR LINER’S Kong, Bwnt Ath siete to witness the ceromony were|each recipient as the .Acting | mig thee ft] “The tacit approval of the | MWSReMARNRARAAARRRRRRA 
. MISHAP - war ulut fede sae and clothing. that. they | the heads ofthe Three Services| Chief Justice, Mr. E.H. Wil-| {rem poe Bee Or David] RUmanian authorities — was BAO DAI HAS 
: when It waa detained with iH Mr. Fevtren fal at 5 ey ca ; Hams, reag out the citation, ahi ‘ nee ae 5 wish Managed in the usual manner . 
Abii jopenhagen, Dee. 30. the passengers on beard alli knew the situation wan Sita ; Following were the awards;:— | Ben Gurion, head of the Jew: with dollars, LANDED IN 
Paris crash-landed” ation The case now rests with the Bertie ine one mheredts pene . P| : (ee oats erg Gisix ee ald Hagana officials in fe Le deter seve LONDON 
Waters 300 yards offshctre from} Norwegian Ambassador and the Ho added that there was no 2 Explosions . guished service In North West} Rumania ordered the Pan York gathered in assembly, pai London, Di 0. 
Kastrup airport tonlyht but. re. Inapector-General of Cuat i] i : . Eurcpe, when the ‘no sallings’ order ndon, Dec, 30. 
mained intact, OMmelals said only| Shanghai to whom the ‘matter | Pani: Inge said “thot sha was y ste d Sub-Lieutenant_R.G.G. Stanton | 804 the Pan Grescent to a came from Jerusalem. Bho Dat, exiled emperor of 
three of the 14 persons aboard! hax been referred alter) more seasick in today’s journey.| FASTOP: ay R.N.R. “DS.0.:~Sub-Licut, Stan. | Burnas not only becausg et “Then the ships were mado/f2nam. arrived here today from 
Were injured, The Norwegian Ambassad Hope Lost |" A.Chinese fireman from Kow-| ton as First Lieutenant of theif conditions were untenable hut! to move from Rumanian ports, ent mission apparently alrned at 
Bre Tate tg te toteel ARG Las lace: ret geued “Ae ‘Nanking. | Commander “Chick Parsons| toon Fire Brigade had both hia| “li Wo" and her only. surviving | because of fears that further “Nearly every rank and file me " 


. Plane into the water us It sottled 
for o landing, 


Tho “Prosper” {gf a Nor-|—famced, Mindanao guerilla or- 


Motor aunches rescued the} WeRian-owned vessel, the local| saniser and Genoral  MacAr-) seid, when he sipped and fell) in cetlon between Sinaupmes and nlan Gove operation rebelled. They decided |chinn. 
] 4 | : . § q rnment, . ‘ 
Pree ors and. crew.—Associated) agents for which in ‘the Everctt | thur’s representative — super-| Peat’ Road, Kewloon, about 3.30| Batavia in February: 1942. eerie Tater ant, an under-|¢™@aration must go on. After neepapers quoted wollintormed 
aa. Steamship Corporation. vised search operations - dis- nye ay Major E..G. Stewart DS-0,.— ° the last ‘minute pleas were re-| 


continued after an examination 
of all uninhabited {alets, 


YUNGCHENG TAKEN 
BY CHINESE REDS 


. pele, 
an two weeks 

moon, according toa reilsole. 
a reliable 
to military headquarters in Nan. 


ig this morning, 
The city was heavily shelled Military despatches from 
Sian. report that General Lei 


by Communists during’ the ‘past 
week and was reported to be a Wen-chien,- the‘ garrison com- 


dreds of small seattered  vil- 
Ingea. . 
Mr. Parsons stated that tho 
hina was sunk betwoon’ 40 and 
60 fathoms and thero ‘was an 
ofl slick two. milés 
Camandag island. 
Heinrich, Matti. fears that 
there is no hope of his: brother 
Dennis, since hie was among 
the 16 occupants ‘of tha lifeboat 
who was not seen after’ he had 
collapsed. into the hatch. 
Accompanying ‘thé Kina’a 


‘4 
f° 


' ‘hntables bon te forces com mander of, Yungchong, ‘was KdIl-| party in the plane wero Mr. and riley bho ft leg+a8 a “ojor Ptrch Esmond MC. veault of this dispute. BO oe at _ from GA” ese : 
eq by Generals Wang Chen | ed in the fightin 1 . : : the} marine ops store, |: —Major 'Esmondg ‘displayed grea’ ie wk: ’ p P 
- and: Li Shien-lien, under’ cover] munteation with ue as. po as Fetea Cameeeeapahg: Tho explosion ‘went: off + as} courdge in establishing o Casualty |~ - oe ee SECOND FLOOR, PRINCE'S. BUILDING, 
| Of g heavy artillery barrage,| been cut. travelling . by, bargo from] sonte bottles wero being washed | Evacuatizn Post. across the hing : W ith ae Pe we neg : 
atormed and entered the city] Another report states that] Cagulguitan to’ Calbayog, who| in x.concrete. water tank. “yin March enone doleyctaany The : @a er (DES, VOEUX ROAD, CENTRAL): ~ : 
yesterday, ee _,| Government  rejnforcoments| were wrecked . near’ Malaga,| No. ono was hurt, and so. far] voce, W ay. , 2 cient |. or ge ; a 
This is the lost Natlonalist which were dispatched ‘from| where fishermen awanr out with} tht cause of tho explosion is et ‘The Intense antleyslone over Mongolla |’ * to 


bastion in Shensi province and 
‘the falt of this city is sald to 
| be comparable with the fall’ ot 
 Ghihchlachwang early © in 
November. . However, a! local| 
Chineso dally this -morniig 
Claimed that Government ‘troops 
are still fighting stubbornly. and: 
‘have inflicted more than: t2:000 
. Casualties onthe Commyn 


nO 


Peiping have been. surrounded 
by Communist. forces in the 
Chungtiao mountains, .—- 
Meanwhile, - the Communist 
seventh offensive which began 
more than ‘n: week ago is’ still 
-Taging in Manchuria and they 
ted to have otrated 
ukden, 


ropes and saved them.——Reuter. 


Ag 


. Goverhinent . 
reported’to be 


p.m. yesterday. ° 


-phuriec acid s 
yard. : 
Two appliances were, rushed 
from Kowloon ‘Fire Bridge tw 
the place, but none | of the in- 
east of] mates was-hurt, and damage 
‘|done-wag'alfght. «. 


arms’ badly burnt by sulphuric 
acid; when he ‘siipped and fell 


About half an-hour- carlier 


En ‘Tung Street 


t known, ° 


On. Train: 


tored in the court- 


three other German warships. 

Another brother, Comman- 
der Witham Esm:nde, OBE, 
was awarded the DSC ‘for ac- 


tion 


inthe sinking ‘of the 


~ German battleshtp, Bismarck, 


in 1941, 


.. He fs at present in Scot. - 
land.—"Ching Mall Photo. 


Major Stewart 
gallantry and 


officer, showed stendfast courage 
in the face of overwhelming odds 


initlotive 


continued ta command’ his com- 
pany with 
his, own stffering. . 
Qghting at: Wong Net 
MoJok ,Stewart’s comvany suffer- 
ed 100° casueltics in officers. and 
80.in. Other Ranks. ‘ 

Mr.. R.S.W., Paterson, O.B-E.t— 


@ total disregard to 
During the 


| Me. Paterscr performed outstand- 


ing services’ during internment. | 


Regi 


geant 


imental Quartermaster Ser- 
gcant Ase. Kew,’ M.BiE; (Mil): 
Regimental Quartermaster’ Ser- 
Kew ‘was: awarded, the 


M.B.E, in 1942 for‘ long and falth- 


ful: servico 


“in’ the’ 


+ (Continued on Page 2) 


Fire Raid 


the gobdds In‘ tho carrlago were 


Hong Kong 


Qisplayed great 
In. .the 


Chung, | - 


PArabs, , 


Open Revolt 


Meanwhile, a Prague report 
faye the “Young Turk" wing of 


_ Year Call 
To Nation 


Nanking, Dec. 30, 
President Chiang Kal- 
shek will broadcast a New 
Year's speech on a. nation- 
wide tomorrow evening. . 
- He will be followed on 
Becretary- 


umigration of Rumania's 860,000 


Jews may soon’ bo cut off by 


grovng worker-who left Burgas 
within the week, said the wide- 


suspend cmigration after partl- 
tion was announced. 
The fight was carried into the 
recent high policy mecting with- 
out succesr ond decisions to 
ignore Jewish Agoncy « orders 
wero taken on the grounds that 
the Palestine authoritics - re- 
fused to recognise tho urgency 
of the situation {In Europe, . 
Ho sald the resignation on 
Sunday of Dr. - Moshe Sneh, 
heag. of the Jewish Agoncy's 
European section was ao direct 


continues to dominate East Asia and the 
nelghbourlng: sen. The deep depression 
centering over the Faolfic to the ‘cast of 
the Kurlle Islante te -moving north 
eastward. - 7 # 


Forecast Moderate. norih-out ..wind, 


during the day, continal cold, 


; Yeaterday’s Weather 


Rainfaltt “NOL Total: glnoe Jan.. I= 
"| 2600.6 mm.=102.68 Ins, as. against an]. 
 averewe Of 2158.8 rug, 9491 fas,’ 


cloudy ‘tn early morning, becoming fine . 


Rumaninn Governments in cut- 
ting off the steady flow of 
Bucharest and Moldavian Jews 
reaching camps in the American 
zone of Austria via Hungary. 
In recent weeks, 


He anig the policy in Rumania 
coincided with the installatton 
ef Ana Pauker as  Foretgn 
Minister and was shortly follow- 
ed in parallel actions by the 
Minister of Interior, Laszlo 
Rajk, in Hungary. 

A former Polish medical stu- 
dent who began work in the un- 
derground’ shortly after’ his, 


Uberntion from a concentration:| : 


ter 20,000 Rumanian Jewa fled 


workers in the land and sea 


Jedted they gave the order. And 
thus the revolt began.”—Reuter 


Notice | 6 | Removal , 


WE WISH TO NOTIFY THE PUBLIC THAT | - 
_. ON FRIDAY, 2ND JANUARY, 1948 ; 
OUR HONG KONG OFFICE WILL BE MOVED — 


- ec caly .. by. } , alleged 

, wt Pern of: the. Koumintang -.|. camp sald. -ttft. two -ahiploads| .bably,an. .accomplice, they... 
TRON Te ee cone can ae el the plan pore ae Lisl i ee De ee ee pol bast lagi te re from Burgas. numbered. “mere “ete ching Mall” reporter. 
di y bee 4 e crews’ calmness a ; nt a aay so eo wi! speak on the’ "Gr than half the. total of Jews in-t’ ¢ A 
Pes nected, lube ramen FOr Gallantry | iofeo! ae Eos cc) 6 ome ay 
the rond to the country’s de-| ., The Chinese Deputy. .Customs| in the mildst of lashing raln and} =: ae Tiger gens oY ae ne eee Ree ” United. Beers a “Tho Rumanian. sea exodus| three ‘hours after the nlleg-— 
ee 7 Fernmestoner, Walle reducing wind in the darkest night, ’ oe a renoae Payee ee : ; wevvesrreredsccororroens| became necessary,” he agid, “af-| ¢d robbery, was told there 

the fine to CN$2,660,660,000 in-]. Awards. for ‘gallantry: and .meritarious service 


He ndded that there were] the place was the. sceno: of a| hostilities in Hong Kong in 1941,| spread revolt of Hagana work-/ wng United Preas. Prose 
still hopes that survivors may iowa explosion, said to have| 4d although. wounded carly infers in Europe , followed tho ress 
be discovered in any of the hun-| originated. from.a drum’ of aul-| He fighting at Wong Nei Chunghc} Jewieh Agency'a decialon to 


ROUND FLOOR, PRINCE'S BUILDING, - 

(CORNER 'OF ICE HOUSE STREET & CHATER ROAD), _ 

“| SERPICE; TO. OUR CLIENTS. ~~~ 
| WALL GONTINUE. AS'USUAL, =.’ 


‘Robbery 


Report of the alleged rob- 
bery first came through at 
6.40 p.m, when four armed 
men were sald to have rob- 
bed the Formers Bank of 
China (whose premises are 
at the corner of Ice House 


arrived, the alleged robber 
and the cashler were taken 
to Central. : 

- The cashier, who said hoe 
had been .knocked uncon- 
- scious, refused to go to hos- 
pital, it was reported, 

Late last night the Police - 
revealed that. the report 
was a falso one. 

The whole thing was pro- 
bably fan inside affair’ and 

ged: robber: who ‘was Dro- 


was in fact no robbery at 


settlement of a. dispute with the 
French over the future of Indo- 


sources as saying a three-point 
offcr had been transmitted to Bao 
Dat by the French.—Associated 


: ee : a ee ae : fe eat atetite HG 


_ ITLOOKEDA DARK WORLD A Medal For Policé 
 “Reaty SS [FROM THE DOCK pe a fe. 
al ee Alleged Bandit Says|#oaaee as SB: 
veareaet, [He Was Beaten Up 


year-old Miss Philippine of 


1947, who attended " lin ee : : meu 
seein Contest. in Atlan= “Your Lovdship can well-imagine what a dark 
ie Clty ase er ay world it $3,in the Police Station,” said Iu Wah 
paper today that she In,’ _ fo Mr. Justice T..J. Gould (Buisne sudee):. at 
tends to chter a convent the Criminal Sessions yesterday, after he ad 
and become a num otting |. made a statement from the dock alleging that 
hortd with this social Ife ‘and fe was beaten by. the Police and forced to con- 
being Invited to so many ess to crimes which he claimed he did not 
dunces, I hive decided to be cominit . oe 
nh nun.” . 

As ‘the winner of | the Iu Wah, together with Wan 


Philippine Alriines beaut dam : 

minten Minas de Castro, rf Ko-chiu, Wan Nam alina Chau Letters From 

Bagulo high school freshman, Man, Yu ‘Lam, Taol Yuen-shun | - ’ 

why taken on o whirl to [and Ip Chau are being tried of Readers 

Hollywood and Atlantic City. | two counts of armed robbery at{ i N iti 
Since her return here | Joydine’s Hill on Oct. 12. Kina Necessities 


severn} months ago she has : : 
Sir,—Several friends of the 


f.und her Cinderella role |) Mr. E.N. Sainsbury, aasisted g is . 
hard to discard,—Assoclated by Det. Insp. McPherson, is con- Matti family are — sending 
Press. ducting the case for the pro- elothing to the Mattls by CALI 
a aecution. ‘plane cn Sst December but it ‘ 
occurs to us there might be : 


; After ftatements which haq| other friends of the Mattis and). Inspector .W, Ni Dackin, was.yesterday awarded thie, Cal. 
| all S$ been made by the accused had| other Hong Kong passengers of onlal Valtee, Bedal: for Gallanisy, for, Nexcapllon a’ ‘onraRe 
been read to the Court by Mr.| the ill-fated “Kina” who might the ee eay fa Tat Oh ina Nall Phot. p ae ' 
i Sainsbury, Tete a eo wish to send articles of clothing 
- D son sajd that after Wan Ko-| to Manila, vine Mb BO aI Fer a ORERPN ICTS ’ wa As apt yh : 
T ep A chiu‘s arrest, the latter took him . a - : ze 
; to different addresses where It would be appreciated if, m * ™, | A. 
? i ima certain of the other accused through the medium of your . > . 
‘ were locuted and arrested, valuable, newspaper, the public ee gg Sik wu ME Bate boot Bes em pea 
00 if . be informed that any packages ' me SS 
Procedure of clothing sent to owe office in ; af a 
“Give mea longer pri Union Building, Hong Kong or : ; 
P ¥ Det. Inap. McPherson also} to our Airline Office, Peninsula ert peer Lat e wget te dad 
son term. I want to be| testified regarding the pro-}| Arcade, Kowloon, up to Tth! anty é Retition, seeming eer front We pen even ee ue 


a good girl. I am asham-| cedure followed ut the Identi6-| January, will be despatched to] mitted yesterday, by the Ohinese Manufacturers’, Union,.on .be- 


; e tion Parade nnd said that all[ Manila .by CALI ‘plane free of halt..of.10 leading: Hong Kong's manufacturer of... toilet, pre- 
ed of my present profes-| cation Parade ine ae drome eee i parations, to the Secretary for..Chinese Affalrs. for tranamis- 


: 4 » were charge, 
sion. Give me a chance re on parade were dressed! charg Yours Malehfully, sion to the Superintendent of Imports and Exports. 
to learn something.” There was no truth whatso- | GOURLIE & CO, CH. K.) LTD. The “petition contends that | into .consideration when fAgaess- 
Thia plea was made by 26-{ ever in the allegations of the Ieeal manufacturers of | toilet ]ini the tax. eet « 
i “By way of illustrating how 


Sear yary 1s -apinees of] accused that they were placed preparations.are, in view of the 
no fixed abode, when she was] on parade barefooted with other high rate of duty, unuble to 
fined $25, or ten days imprison- Serious who wore shoes and had 41 DECORATED . offer any competition to import- 
ment, by Mr. W.H, Latimer at] their hair well combed. FOR GALLANTRY | a products and will be forced 
Kowloon) — yesterday on the On conclusion of the ense for ott of business unleas the sys- 
charge of disorderly conduct. the prosecution, each of the six (Continued from Page 1) tem of levying duty is revised. 

According to Inspector J.) accused made a. statement from The petition says the -new 
Orem, accused was shouting and] dock, denying all knowledge of] Divisional Officer RAEI. Brooks | rate of duty is inquitable and 
awearing ‘‘vutaide the Queen's] the robbers and. alleging that and Station Officer C, Browne, unfair, If points out that as 
Restaurant, Nathan Read, about! they had been beaten by the King’s Police and Fire Services duty on imported p¥oducts ix 


10 p.m. on Dee, 29, causing al Police and forced to confexs. Medal Jor Gallantry; —With com: | new payable on the f.0.b. price 
large crowd to collect, plete disregard for their personal 


-} Troi Yuer-shun claimbeg that] catety, these «flere performed | &% shipping port, it means that 
There was no doubt that she he was busily engaged on the autety. hie eors performe 


the revised duty discriminates 
agninst locally made producta, 
the petition includes ao table of 
comparison setting forth the 
duty payable on a few well- 
known brands, both local and 
imported, in accordance: with 
the new and old tariffs. 

It stresses that. While the in- 
crease in duty under the revised 
system on imported goods. is 
comparatively small, tho in. 


le work on the oc-| the freight, insurance, landing 


had been drinking, sald Insp. day of the robberies. ension of a severe fire on the ss. | delivery ind storage. charges, | crcase on locally manufactured: 
Orem, who added that she Waa} He sald that he was cmployed| “Sal On" on Feb. 4, 1947. | bank interest and) commixsion,| products is staggering. 

n well-known character, in cutting grass, carrying pix-| are par. Blake lat Fi agent’s commission, brokerage,| “We have been ani re, stil] 

From the dock, defendant} wash, feeding pigs and looking Screlers ET Gee Mecteetans aswell) as the importer’s| greatly hampereg hy: the exor- 

stated that several! European) after a friend's baby. vl Serticer—Mr, Binke | performed | cstimated profit, are not - taken] bitant’ cost of local; labour, 

: had been borrowing money from admirable and gallant: worl as _ | transportation and materials as 
her and she was only trying to Corroboration head of the Auxiliary Fire Ser- ; ; well as decreased production, 

obtain repayment of a loan‘ that E ise i ener ‘ vicr during the hostilities Jn 1941. Pp ; li : “Our difficulties are xe pe- 

night. vidence in correborntion © ‘ he ing considerably aggravated. by 

Inspector W.N, Darkin, Colont- ersona la the new rate of, dut whith -has 


- “this atory was given by Ho Yun- a 
: Senttle, Ded, 30, :{lan, married woman, who de- al Police Medal for Gallantry:— 
: . ’ OY / Ree : Inspector Darkin displayed ex. 

The Chinese nosed dut the|clared that Tsoi war employed! ceptional courage and great devo- 
Hawalian All Stars 48 to 43 on] by her at $20 a month, plus food.| tion to duty through the Japan- 
Sunday in-the finals of the first} When it whs suggested to Ho}ese attuck on the Colony, parti: 


the effect of placing: ‘oir pro. 
duets at a much greater: dis- 
advantage than hitherto in com- 
parison to imported goods ndds 


Passengers aboard the BOAC 
flying-boat from Singapore which 
arnved on Monday were Major 

M, Sutton, Dr, C. P, Alten, 
Messrg W.F.G. Harris, Kong San- 


annual Oriental - American | by Mr. Sainsbury in the courge|CWlarly in regard ts the internal | the petition, 
i) 5 : ‘}security of the Colony, kin, Lau Chang, Lum Sun-sens,| Pp 7 
basketball tournament, of cross-examination, that Tsui M pid CY. Lec, A.B. Hughes, Rosser ays ' e 


bd Willie Wong led San, Fran-| Was more than an“employee to} potice Constable Yau Fuk, Col-}K.Y. Kam, Miss B.M 


cisco with 27 points, The} her, Ho was most indignant and) oniat Police Medal for Gallan. | Mrs. Kong Cheung-may, Mrs, ¢ ony : 

Chicago Huskies took. the con-| said that she was a married try:—P- lice Gane Yau Fue |Y. Lee, Mrs, C.¥. Kam and Mas. “BIG BEN” WALE 

solation finals for third place] woman. performed gallant conduct in aid- |ter Kong, Njit-fen. : CHIME AGAIN ; 
by defenting the Seattte Nisei! Hearing will be resumed at ing two persons Ina heavy soa}. Hong Kong Airways brought , 

Listeners. over ZB she 

tr the 


45 — i ‘ : when a Police launch was struck; |from, Shanghai on Monday the 
45 to 27.—Associated Press ri 10 uum, today. by a mine near Pingehau Island [following passtngers: Messts B.| reminded that at mij 
i - in July 1946, W, Talbct, Eric Watts, LA. Mac-) fonight they will hea 

: kenzie, Fouveau, K.L. Chen, C, Y.] chimes of ig Beh, 
hering In the New Year. 


Chen, T.W. Tung, R.C, Cheng, My 
RIERA 


i aa Eh we is a 2 Lance Corporal Chan Sang, 
Colontat Public Medat for Gal-|S.F, Fu, Cheung Kuo-chun, Lee 
b . : i lantry;--Lance Corp:ral Chan | Ping.cheng, K.Y,. Ho, Mrs. B.W. 
nage : Sang displayed great courage on] Talbot, and the Misses Betty : 


rm | Th j spcelal patrol in Dec. 1946, when | Talbot, EB. Anderson, T.V. Chang Saree 

i - he ond on Emergency Unit con- |and Cheng Po-kin. : 

om 4 ae stable apprehended two suspects, oee F a 

one of whom opened fire and Cathay Pacific Airways passen- Hon on 

Tb are 3 Derry a . . wounded Chan Sang. gers from Hong Kong to_Manilo g 

; fhere is no possibility whatsoever of the bus ser-| - Bere ticy included: Mr, Go Soon | a, Pete 

ong “Kong being restored jx the im- BEM Awards Tai, Mr, Go, Si Lay, Mra, Tan Ty.| (a. 0S. & au, 
mediate future, unk i, the China Motor Bus The British Empite Medal was Mr ET hg eesti n 1s nN. 

Lid. ts the dethands of its em- 
estan of the, strik 


& 


OC. 


po ‘ers eptionally brave and loyal con. | Keng, ie ore : mes Me Hing 
Y ‘ 4 _ ‘ a3? ‘ uc uring 8%! es: ola, r, On; “E00, n 
the. “China Mail” last . Mr, Au Fal, 
headquarters fén, Mr, William ‘Cheng, “Mr. | Bit T° 
Chung Tak Kwong, Mr. Kndrew |So Pin Blo, Mr, Co Sang, Mr. Go 
Chon, Mr, William Chong Gun,{ tt, Captaln Wynn, Mr, Lung Lam, 
transport probicm, Mr, Iman Din, Mr. Lau Ming Sa, Geo Mihi 
No sanction had yet been re-| Mr, Lee Lup, Mr..Li Ting Sanu |: Bee a Monin oot , 
celved to run these lorries, -1t be-|Mr. David Lam, Mr. Nal Kwong! It.is a long established custom for ute, 
Wards in- ig intimated, that’. the decision | Ma, Mr, John Pau, Mr. Tong Wo, [ Catholics, to sing a "Te Deum’ , in drari 
i the  afrikers imto an|reditd with the Commissioner o |Mr.. Tse Dickaun, Mr. Wong Sik | their Churckes on the laze night af {viee Corps, but there. ar 
“uncondithcnal surrénder,”” ‘}Kuen, Mr, Michael Wong Tshin|the year, and th On 
Questioned regarding the ¢n-| “China Mail’ re-|On, Mr, ‘C.H. Parsons, Mr. Vin-|is being broadcast from, St,. Jaseph’s 
latment of new drivers to take|porter was interviewing the[cent Young,: Mr. Yick Chung ¢ loail 
over the posts of those on. atrike, | strikers’ spokesman, representa- | Lee. nk: ; ies 
the spokesman sald that some, 50 |filvee from various fellow Unions]. Mr. Richard Malig . and. Mr. 8 + 
coolies from the Chiu Chow’ dnd {Were calling in and handing over.| Emundo da Silva—British Empire) te Rev, John .M. Spada of the 
. Hol Luk Fung .Dislkicts .wore re- utions. which. are being | Medal:—These to constables at| cathol{e Mission F mthine veaterda 
crulted by-the Company. recently conalderablo . risk to thelr OWN} ccfebrated hie S1st blrthda he weil 
Jt was. the hope of. the, Cor flives extricated four persons who } ii, Stlgk Mews in Lovsar of th 
paty, that thesa_men, after, ab ar had-been buried under tho debris | "0K 0. gh, ime not oe iholie 
celerated course of training, een} icf. a bomb. damnged house which Cathe +i ‘ur am, In the atholi¢ 
would be passed out as fit to ppprecsed by the Company to the{ collapsed in. Aug, 1046... |. athe fal to-morrow, , sy + [iable to, servo, cuts! 
dilve public buses.’ kerg asking them to report for| The King's Commandatlon was ather Spada je one, of, the oldest) kong, but,,.dt, te” p20! 
When = they - enlisted... ,thege j duty. 00. é ieiyane awarded to: the following-for gal- | European renidents ... in the colony, | ensign except in) 
ccolles were not aware of the! : Cgftiuding. the interview,, the Mant and distinguished — conduct j having acrived in. Hong Kong ln linot they should ‘ 
true situation between the Com-| spokesman sald that the demands | during -hostllitles:—- $092, He has occupied several, hat yen will be; cilleted 
pany ond the strikerai: 24. . es vill 
They had since been informed fatter {en years’. service, were | Yan, Mr, Kwan 


and as a result, some 30 imme: st reasonable,- having regard | Wiliom Lee,, Mr. ‘Leung. Chu! gpdeath of the fate Mgr, Pozzoni; For : 
diately resigned, leaving: about Othe fort that the men, had al- ya r. Pang . Kw : Mie, Ss na reserve llabl 


ity, 
Kwok Yee. many . years..Fr, Spada. was also It may later be dee} 
20 still. undergging’ train ready, made ‘a number of conces-| Tauna Chan Baok, Mr. Wu Wat{® of ch in Kawlaon Tength_o Rervice, 
“Tho tirikers ete. indat Beetle slons. mee! ‘ay. Heeedaa <0 Beste h Site | eceeao the th of. 


al ahout the Pollce Trafic. De, 
partmént sass! ene. ay ale un . : ie .,” Ptending.. thee servicetf 
dual, who had undergone an oc-] ... . : ‘. Gosia aif Se were sultable.- - - 
crenata caus ak training 1 eee tifpentiy rt cat in, Recruits m 
ea BUDE! , : “Fe . | Ler : , natlopality,, medica 
’ . ‘ . a ‘ ; i _ AK ‘ P ne es tween the, a¥¢s gt 18 
Recruiting. is Spen''t 
rh men, and during their’. 
fl amen: Will not only. 
iter emirate 
t i : : : : a, . f ! “6, ae will learn-o trade. | Du 
Tig, oi BUTULer eed . > Peervico all men will bei 
of: training, - ; y VA 2" Sf opbprtunity” to. Ledge. 
i@ome’ out, frm: she, :f ” Pe oO EECOR: enlistm tng; is 
ly 


. ! he ute ; : a ke Ps. Go Pry ; : calves. 25° a day As Das 
oe i eas a uo ( hd UE a -[ steni Shao- hava ADeCInN 3 


| fecctve a ntaher 
ae 


recruiting 6 


Hang Hone 
The ma 


Royal . Army. 


6.30 pan “ ‘}ous Headquarters; — lo 


man, teckniclins and 
Men who volun 


THR CHINA MAIL, WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 81, 1087, . 


“Tbusinels for the ye 


awarded to the following ‘for ex- | Mr. Chua Ma Chio, Mr. Te Sin Headquar' ers tana by t 


Mr. DL, B. Chin} Kt Ui, Mr. David Gan, Mr, ‘Lin the British Regular. 
: |B ‘Mr, Ng Sui Yom, Mr.{ ‘These personnel will taka their, 
place in some of the Adminisirn- 
tive Units at present stationed iu 


Ay ot the vice’ , 
f 11g f in. Bi 
present Ore ttt ene wi 


yacangies with 
nag, and tho Royal 


which’ cas? those already serving 
would be given {he option:of ex. 


. 
' 


INA_UNDERWRI 
_ MEETING [ie tia 
Chairman's Report | 51" Mies. 


“Is Optimistic 


ee os eet o tiat 
“The fall in, yetiewal of in 
: any, is 
mnpany, js fe 


come is an adverse factor 
be, built up satisfactorily. 


rable in the future inter- 


ests of the Company that premium income. 


, shduld Ps maintained. 


“The ‘encouraging results of new 
Fie 1946 and ‘1997 


nive every, reason to hope that we 
can resume an cppward: trend in 


of war rick premiume belng much re- 


duced, Huslness was practically eonfined J 


lo Hong Kong and Accident husinesa was 
not recommenced untll Augbst 1016. 
“Clalma were light and, with the alloca- 


Premium Income and in fact T think rune: to the varlods funda made at the 
le in prabable that the Life Premium [beginning of pho year, the palantes at the 
Income, for 1947 will not fall) far Jonil of the year were auMclent to provide 


short of the Income for 1940 and that 
the following year, will show a fur- 
ther Increase,” said Mr. H, J. Arm. 
strong, Chairman, at, the annual 


(ar ft have mlready alated) Reserves for 
unexplred risks of 40¢% of the year's Pre~ 
miume in the Fire and Actident Accounts 
and 00% of the year's *Premiums In the 
Marino: Account. In aitditlon, we have 


general roecting of the China Under: | transferred from Profit. and Lose $20,601 
writers, Lined beld in the Com- [to the Flee Fund and $10,000 to the Are 


pany's office , yesterday. 

In the course of his speech, the 
Chairman said: 5 °°. " 

“Although the accounts before you are 
Uf neceenity stil) [0 some ‘extent appro: 
ximate, they are very considerably more 
aceurele than the statement for 1945 anit 
may be consldered, for all practleal jure 
poses, to give @ true representation of th: 
Company's Kevenve anid Lalance Shert 
poultion at the end of 1946, 

“TR will be borne In mind that the 

tenient, of Affafra at Step December, 
1536, thaugh in form of a Balance Bhret, 
eqntinined several lace Items which werr 

mittedly very approximate, es, the 


cident Fund fcr contingences. 

“PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT: This 
Account Includes the, Interest not carried 
to other accounts and the profit on Sales 
of Shares, also aundry amall adjustments 
{nm anseta and Habllitien for which the 1045 
Gmuren proved incorrect. The followlns 
sums have been transferred from the 
Profit & Lows Accounti— ¢ 

To the Life Assurance Accatint $200,000 


To the Fire’ Insurance ” 20,000 
To the Accident Inaurance .. 10,c00 
3140,000 


“Leaving a balance of $22,280) which 
It fe propixed chould br carrled forward 


eatimsied outatanding Life Claims and} to 2047. 


Ue calimated. Policy Loann. 
“The retative itema In the Blatement o} 
Affatrs haye bean taken ps the InStial ene 


Accounts, and, fn dealing with the ne 
oojints before you, 1 will refer to the 
adjuatmente which Have become neceaeary 


“NALANCE BUEET: The Cupital patd 


¢ pup shows no amall Increase aver the Mure 


fn the 1045 Statement of Affalra owlase 


ilerlee in our books for the 1048 Revenue]? xmall amount of Calla palit tn 1041 


which were not shown In Inst yenr'n ace 
count and which have come to Heht In 
the examination of sharehotders' oertlil- 


In that atatement as the result of further enton, 


Information alnce obtained. 

Yn the Statement of Affalra for 14h 
the aum of $714,081 wan allocated renernl- 
ly to Life, Fire, Accident and Marino In. 
surance Funda, 

“This total figure has naw bern res 
allocated to the various funds In the fol- 
towing manner: after allocating euMeleut 
funde at the beginning of the year to 


Reserves 
“Tho Genera) Resetve Fusd hav been 
maintained nt $100,000 and the laveatment 
nod Exchange Reaorve atandn ot $70,082, 
the renlland profit on ale af necurltlen 
during 1040 having been taken bo Profit 
ant Lone tnateud of crediting it ta Ine 


show a balance on Bat Decembet 0 veatment Fivetuntion Heverve na wita 
to cover reserves for unexpired rinks OF | iualty done in the pat, an the margin 


40% of the 1048 bremium [ucome In th 
Fire and Accident Accounts and 6045 fn 
the Marine Account, the balance has been 
earned ty Life Fu 


Individual Accouiits 


for 1046, ” 


malaly derived 


enge Account. 


yom Ouistandiic 


an Tucrease over the Life Asmurance Fund 


Mocated at the beginning of the year. 


‘ 


Me 
Fitish 


<b. They Will. be 


ed hi ; alaaeiegre ih Re 
PE the: strikers, momely, gratulty | Mr. Percy. Cheng, Mr, Ip Ming portant positions, among, them that of at ‘Service ,ongt t 
Ing ‘ithe Wie | Acting © Viear “Apostolic after, ain (tae ene ith phe colour, With 


Yurma with @ amall amount from Malaya, e 
ave. very considerably higher than In any | cludes all knawn elaima, many of which 


1946, and the current year xlve every rea~ 
to antlelpate that this will be accom 


:| pilahed very quickly. ; 
"Back premluma for 1941 to 1946 for] fairly considerable margin between 


policies which went off the books durine| Market..Valuew qnd Wook Values of our 
Hit) ‘ay Years are shown ecparately in tho } investments. Oe 
La! eae 


“The Lite Assurance Fund at December 


eniltled 0 
‘also | NAS «, aid Army recreational 
in year this, ceremony | openings in the. Royal, theers ¢ facilities, «| 

Aj Ordinapeo., Corps; ty tig the 

Catholic Church, Garden Roait, , at ;and on the estgblishmeph of jowance for 


"between the market value and the book 


value af the Inveatmenta wae conalderable 
nnd it wna therefore deemed unnecessary 
ta augment this Reserve. 

“Tha Outatandlis Lite Clalma reacrved 


“L come now to the Individual Accounts | for nt December Sl, 1946 were found to 


have bec considerably overestimated and 


“LIFE REVENUE ACCOUNT: = The [u niet relenne af $100,000 to Life Revenue 
New, Premiums at $876,397, although | Account. hee consequently been made, 
from Mong Kong and | Allowing for thie giljustment, thy Maure 


of $1,168,460 mt December 31, 1046 in 


treme during the yerts 1941 to 1943 which 
for varioua ronsona had. not bees, aettlet 
at the end of 1946, and an estimated 
gter ctalma sili 


Life Pollelys n44 41,028,042 


“The 


“Apart f 


Actuarial Lfabiittics, 


5 ENUE, The premiums inl ness for the ¢ years from 1942-1045 there 
these aécou! were considerably load’) can be Ittle doubt that the i 

than fn 71940, although the Marine pre} will provide a fairly large 

miuma exceeded the 1939 Agure in apltc 


the Actuarial Liablilties and 


haa ever hitherto been. 


“The actuarial, valuation of the Polley 
Liabilities 4 December 31, 1940 fe naw 


in cuurse of preparation. 


an. were: 
Castro, 


Food And 


Fund of $200,000, the Investment and 
Exchange Reserve Fund of £70,102 and o 
the 


rom: these Reserves tho Lite 
Assurance Fund and pald up Capltal of 
31, 1946, after transferring $160,000 fron} the Company amount to $2,450,404 which 
hong and Low and $107,000 released | together form the security: far Life polley 

Clatme reserve, shows] holders, that ja the reserva agalnat 


“with a much redaced Life Renewal 
palm SERENE &. MARINE RE-| Income due to the absence of new busl- 
U \CCOUNTA + 
a) 


rey 
sposttfon of the Company js, we can reas 


sonably hope, considerably better than It 


"EL now bee to propose the ndoptation 


|Fual Costs 


ERS, .. 
She Travelled 


To Marry. 5° 


Watford, ‘Hoxtforshire, 1, 
ke “ Bece 
Bo’ that. she could: be 
mayried' at the: chtirch 
whi her © father © and 
mofher:wers “wed, Miss 
Gwendoline Elizabeth Weit- 
xel,of Venezuela travelicil 
6,000 miles by land, sen and t 
_ afk! fors heb wedding. at St, 
_ Johh's Chiirch herp today. 
-. The ‘bridegroom, © Mr. 
Douglas G. Crew, also of 
Vencaucle, travelled with 
er. rie 
Mr. dnd Mrs. H, Weitzel, 
hor parents, Journeyed from 
Buenos: .Alres\ with: the : 
bridesmaid, ' Miss, ‘Le Bas, 
The bride and bridegroom 
will Jater go to Malaya, — 
Reuter. Nona i 


See 


Londoners 
Switch Back — 
To Sléet 


London, Dec. 30. 
Snow which blanketed 
the north of Brituin .yes- 
terday, today spread to 
the south and Londontci's 
coming’ out of their 
offices for lunch shivered 1 


in a shower of sleet... 
Further south in the Strait: 
Dover, the temperature fell t 
degrece  Fahrconhelt—the —-Towest 
{hls moath, The outizok ig “con. 
tnuling cold.” Be Oe sete ait 
But the Orst heavy snowsills 
of whiter so ‘far remain confined 
to the north, where mountain 
ecads are slippery nnd dangerous 
and where fog ig delaying trains 
up to two hours... . 
Carlisle, todny “registered elght 
degrees of frost.) In the Derby- 
shire peak district; 31 blizzard lef. 
behin a layer of snow; fron: 
three ty nine inthe, d.ep aad 
anow-ploughs WOE working 
throughout the night to keep the ‘ 
malin yronds open.<2) 
In the Livirpoolfarea, ¢vernight 
hailstorm froze wt? sheets of fcc, 
bringing traMc uimost to a stand. 


still.—Reuter, 


WAR MEMORIAL. 
FUND 


Subscriptions received on Dec. 
0; 1947.” a rage 


Mr, S.W. Lre $10,000, Messrs, 
Palmer & ‘Turner, $5,000. Hing 
Kong Football Assoelation (Stun. 
ley Shield Competition $2.502 38, 
Double Tenth Match $2,636.04)— 
$4,696.32, Americaf Internitional 
Underwriters, Lid. $2,000. 
Hong Keng Hotel 
$2,000, Metropolitan 
Ltd. $1,000, The 
Bank Inc, $1,000, Mes 
son Wilson. & Co., 3 
Varlous Members of Hong Kong 
Jockey Club $700, (Young 
Women's . Christian -Associatlon 
$200, Mre. H. T. Peng $20, Mrs. 
T.C, Wang $20, Mrs, P.C, Kwok 
$20, Mrs, Fing,. Ping Fan $50, 
Mrs, HLF. Tai $20, Mrs. Lo Kwong 
To $20, Mrs. James T. Choy $30, 
Mrs, S.Q. Phoon $50, Mrs. C, K. 
Cheng $20, Mrs. Wong Wah Lum 
$10, Mrs. Lam. Chik Suen 350, 
Mrs, P.K. Au $20, Mrs. Shin Kwel 
Sang $10, Mr. & Mrs. Lamuert 
Kwok_$100)-—-$660,  Mevsrs, Op- 
torg Co, (Malaya) © Ltd, $500, 
Staff & Students Diocesan Boys’ - 
School $283, Mr, G.W, . Sewell 
$2650, Mr. & Mrs. 8S, Masin $250, 
K.BG.C, RaMe $250, M:ssrs. D. 
Chellarom $101, Dr. T.-J, Hua, 
O.BE, $100, Dr. & sMra.. B.C. 
Wong $100, Mr. F. McD, 
Mr, and. 
H.. Blake $100, 
Tones..$50,: Dr, W.C. 
Tson,.M.B., B.S, $30, In Memory 
ef the late. Mrs, . Aimes. White 
From: Mr, & .Mrs,'C.W.L, Sprad- 
bery, $10.—Tota} $30,083.32 Hong 
Kone Government  Contribullon 
' $30,083.82, ; Reeeived:. to Dec, : 
1947, $3,827,226.60, Grand T 
$8,587,393.24,°. >) : 


COOLIE AND. VEGS. 
"BOTH. WENT. 


Kom, Klog, a cBolle,, won, on- 
rat Central 


cattlés+——: 
Rico & Flour .. 7.3. $4.5700, 
Yegetab ea teevees LP 1.0260, 
2 nagn. at Cabbage : 
An- rr veeereee 


p.m... 
Ml 


Datly-pald Workers 
ns’ 0 
340. 


sent id: him: to. one 
imprisonment, , - " 


Bist of-Bonatjohs * 


“f ID og od SOD 

Koi ug aa asoclation, e- 
get fi Oe eS frost 
all. Matches <7,32,421.04.-airendy 
rw lexiige 22,078, hate 


His Excellency, 
Fovetnor- in-Couneil; oe 

fg:on the: ‘recommenda: | 
on of a Special. ‘Tenancy 
| Tribunal er ais Mr; 


man). and. Mr. aa Hospes 
f Chung’ Kwan: 
hing ‘(Miembeis),: ee £0 
China’ - Mail!” is 
informed; exenipi 


mi 
‘at Be phat ecu 
Francia Hotel, 

tlotl-6f Hone Konig La Santa 


Daria Te 


fomoet stor of SAME golbira 
eppeoriag 
| OTHE REST YEARS OF Cum tives : 


Kolynos Dental Cream fe 
concentrated,..just a half. 
inch of {t helps Icavo your 
teoth clean and sparkling, 
Kolynos’ freshens your. 
breath, too. Its abundant, 
ploasant-tasting foam 
really “wakes up” your 
whole mouth, Kolynos ts 
a favorite because it... 


ownbra of thi “4 
piene Y "oatattel 
ang odtsmoded Butrint 
erect ih plats tHeredf 
ten-atorfed bitilding. « - 

Work onthe aemmollttodl of: i1 
Rotd Cértril,. 
adjoltd 18 Queth's Rody ' Cn: 
‘tral, hes already’ <¢omitticed. |! 
The proposed tiew sttittard Will 
cover the area dt ptéatnt dccu- 
nied by 11 and 18 Quéen's Rofd 


The poetiritit datlo’ 

nao nal 
Counelt Wad ttiaGe by'the Spetiat |. 

Tetuiney Tribunal unger Sectloit | 
92 of the Lindldtd and ‘Ténatt|' 


eee er err erere ys 


pile aah So's miebeee 


hori red acqui. two instalments. 
-Hong Kong Perea’ orm Meanwhile staff members 0! 
S ale ie das at ieee tae and: jin- the Chinese Maritime Customer 


Ww ith. ets horhient. if four miffon Chintse dol 
Ta sid e red vat will aie be one “winter clo:hing, fee" nk euch che " 
; an an avertige of 100 exposures fvo.-monthy Pay og 4 yoar-en” 


SHRPPSABRED 


THA UHINAT eee WEDREBDAY a ae 7 


tn Qe vied ns gues 
4 
' 
- : 
e 


n Shaiitial | 


ee Shanwhai, Dec. 30, 
. Several hundréd work- 
of thé Yee Tsoong 
‘obacco, Kompany (bet- 
tes “-Rnown as the 
Bateléh Améri¢an * To- 
bacéo Company). fac-} . 
tory in the eastern dis-| . 
trict of. SHadghai- went 
oday and lock- 
ed in. the foreign and 
CHinégé stall mbémbers 
for seVéral hours as la- 
bour. and . management 
ey alta over the year- 
bonus spread. 
According. to official. . informa- 
tion, ‘some few thousand worl:ers 
labour. guilds (unions) 
regent either on a go 
trike or. a walked out 
over, the bonus fssu 
_ An the majority: Bt there dis 
putes, the workers are objecting 
o the management's Intention of 


7,000 Mana [paying the ‘oMcinily sanctioned 
ile , Plant one-month yotr-end’ bonus in 


x fbove in. thé, $71 
botegra 


n ween ry | teday' dett ‘ad geslow atrike 
to enforce , éir demand tor r 


b 
orihe present § system. ,Ot | The strikers decided to send 1 
the .Queen sbital | aotegation to the Ministry. of Fin. 
Le ter ustiig outdsited tipi -Jance in Nanking to appeal for "r 
can. only accommodate. 150 better wago. treatment” in lin 
h, the, actual living cort, hore 


Ofdinance 1047 after protrheted 
legal protectiings: 
Interviewed: by the 


> cleans, tastes good... 


ithe allegation that npr taniper dl with thie | 9 200 exposures a day. — | wi 
4s economical/ c 


électric métet and so defraude 
. Light & Power -Co. 
between: April and 

by Mr. B. A. Barnacer! 
led woman, was char 
laix-Kerr, with «frau 
of electricity. 


M. W. Lo of Messrs, 


tive of the St. ecott joi 7 
Co.; (2933) ae trtlnatéa that 


een * alec aad 


the right - al Speetiients 
Gavernttir-in- Chicf t& frant the 


analated by ‘Sub- 


The strikers .eald today thi’ 
they hod to wark sinwer ag th:' 
ralarles did fict | allow them 
“eat meals laree ennugh for cm 
stent work.’—Reuter, 


‘various peony of os 
eremben | 1947; was made 


reek be Ne We Sg, pans. And The 
rged. B tly consuming a Band 


‘for dlapose of all evid PICKED | 
hi, Instructed Mr.) for her to spose all evidence | -. p ; t 
ee of the illegal connectior .” EUROPEAN S 
Mr. R. H. V. Ribelro, chof Playec¢ Sn POCKET 
tester and installation engineer 


Ingpéctor Macdorinid Mr. A, 8. 


Comber of Messrs. Hastings |of the’ Ching Lights, gave tech- 


. LOITERING 


AH SHEESH S SSE RHE HED 


New Delhi, Dec, . 80. Peading guilty to picking th: 


& ‘bo, appenred for the defen-|nien! evidence tia to what would!) ony panda of the Rafpu' ocke' of Mr. Nelacn Slater of |: 


After being ‘tola. to 


atid ‘to ath. ae a ‘ 
the sale ee, Ae Prior to opening the case, Mr.- 
ad- | reversed. 31 years servite fh the Ind{fan 
0] ditional charge of fraudulently 
‘consyming a quanlity, of | elec | tests he: made when he found 
tricity on the night of Nov, 26| Meter 35836 was nop repisterang Sir Rober: Lockhart, = la 


against. acovaed. 


he Was arFeatec 
Watdron of a “OL Db nese 


ppew 
tet te Sar 


Bee (ad fer!) Oe ditierence! 


‘In his. outline of the 
the ph counse] said thac on 
question an In- 7 i r Kowloon 
ce mid two nasistdint, of ple cone ple from 1 

‘Chitn Light were checking] to, them) 


t a0 Prince Edward Ro: 
oe ee per He will be sueceeded as.Com 
the) wble, the centre of which was a y q 
eas fina been tarpe'odl| wert to the touch, ay meng the] ander lnchiet by, Lieutenant}. (Expert aie 
an Oo wites of 


bey carried out atest on the] that the sockets had been in use 
-which- - proved - con- 
aively that theft of electricity 


was hesitd’ wap fou 


and grtierdd to be expe ae uy the 
the- Cay ag an ele incters 


"was ‘not opened to}, _ 
7] 7 ’ After two or 
Fale, force al fiiifies it tbe Hes fh the flat 


p.men-Clode: obo: Down. - i 
6.00 ee ery Bomb ‘ERIE al: salted 
: end of which the door was|’ 


MARRIAGE ANB OTHER 
SETTLEMENTS 


The advantages detiged: ‘Uiereftom 
merit investigation by all svho.wau! 
anfeguard the future for themselves 
and their dependants. 


a catesing the fiat, contin. 


ete they. alleged 
{Illegal connection. 
They found markings 


* This is Just ° 


happen when the two wires!Rifies played “Acid Lan, evens he European Y.M.C.A,, whil: 
(positive and neutral) in the when Genetal Sit Robert Lock-| n a tram in Queen's Road East 
terminal box of a meter wera |hart left New Delhi today after | rorny Wan-ctiun, 22, a hawker 
‘vas sentenced to three months’ 
sfoprlsonmnent by: Mr.. .F.X. 
Almada i Piatt veateriay-| 
e .wallet which ccntained 
Mr. P, E. FF, Rozarlo, meter | on hig way home tothe United| %4¢G0 and documents wag re- 
msfiector, ueclared that’ when Kingdom, became Commander- ‘urned to the owner, 
is arsigtaits . and himself en-| i, ohieg of the Indian. Army on 


Army, from which he retired: as 
After detailing the varlous Commander-tn- -Chief on New 
ear's 


‘Don’t miss. the First isstie of 


“THE EASTERN MESSENGER” 


Father Sheridan 8. I. 


ie wr EASTEANT 
CATHOLIC: 
MAGAZINE 

48 pliiges for 40 cents H.K. 


ON SALE TO- ‘DAY 


KELLY & WALSH LTD, Chater Ra, 
SWINDON BOOK CO. Niithan Rd., Kowloon, 
CATHOLIC CENTRE, King’s Bidg,, " Hongkong. 


Yearly Subscriptions of $6 (post frée), indy be gent to: 
: ‘ ; 


Eastern Messenger Office, 
Wah Yon College, Hong Kong, 


‘WHITBREAD’S is here , - 
BRITAIN’S BEST and... 
THE REAL THING 


WHITBREAD’S. 


FAMOUS | 
PALE ALE 


NOW AVAILABLE. 


at all-Wine Dealérs, Clubs and Hotels 


. Ss. WATSON & CO., LTD. 
_ WINE MERCHANTS. 


ered the second floor (afler 8) August 15, after acting - as 
of | 


overnor the - -Northwest 

Y had, obi admivanc | Ronin aber tt oe ” SIBE RIAN” FUR ‘STORE 
referendum, whic! sulted in 
i power sockets installed in the ché province's accésalén. tc 


pantry, 


. Below these sockets was-a Pakistan, 


General F.R. Bucher  (Chicf- 
3f-Staff who will be relieved on 
Apri! 1 when for the first time 
in ite history the Indian Army 
will be commande by an Indian 
oflicer.—Reuter, 


three plugs — oO ‘definite proof 


recently, said witness, 


_ Power Meter 


other end conn.ated to 4 socket, 
four of the lights weat on. 

Prior to this teat, said wit 
new, -he had instructed his 


Wn EM #2 ’ F 
FURS! 
assistant. to disconnect the 


negative lead dt tho terminal CoO ATS ! 
box. The lights, went out. e 
When the’ testing wire was! Hearing will be continued, this} - oo 

hae round me “Pipe, sia ae ene 


| Sbitaney Notices 


tho d. th H Conga 
CAPT. : BOWMAN ere react aweths 


apland, C. Theveria 
fia Tokyo of Capthin George: Bows cat J ueek 
an{: former Tikes tn Pr har he : 


on a Dal d States. 
Ko 


water tap . near 


ervices offered 
one of many services . id power plugs sein lestith ed. 


with the assurance . 


that. at thot ‘time, 
tenant .and- ma all 

tho ‘clectric billa. | 
ries | The decounts were :m 
iin the name of another. person 


CONTINUITY 
EFFICIENCY 
EXPERIENCE 


PERSONAL ATTENTION - sel, accused sald , 


We io’ pod been: back for nee time. and 
‘and ‘Producid ty | that. the other . person wag. no |: 
longer in charge: df the flat., 


GONGKONG AND 8 
+ She was, tho ‘0; 


WONGKONG (TRUSAEE) : 
the Trustee Company 8! ie 
Hongkong and ‘Bhané! 
aaa 


: \Captalp Bowhtan lott - Hong i" 
Kong by .the .!Prés, Grint” on 

Dec, 23 for Tokyo ta tnke over Pe, 
iF eamanagesehlp of USL Id 


ts, ea: it, yi Sg 


BAe ctseles; wha" 47 year of he 
a y 

wit? served’ fa ‘both "World a Eten Ree 
H "Aa Worl ‘Wie i. IE he. wad, r ane i fr ra 
| -Anthin. . tag : 
iNagth 


d! 
Cnatto,,. A. z a, Mors 


Us Peay in 


d 
Hi ae Glee 


ip ie aasa ership io] ; 


sen wa 


F diicaiaa eter h 
tees 


eet spa 
ae ithe site tom ry, 
ig ated, d ad i 


Lge Oe on Hf ae 


Go } 
27 DES VOEUX ROAD, C., 
182 NATHAN ROAD, KOWLOON 


JACKETS ! 


PLATINUM, 


for you | to o buy: ‘seletted cual FURS, 


eet 


* pho &. VT 


CLASSIFIED | 
ADVERTISING 


20 WORDS 82 FOR ONE 
INSERTION PREPAID, $1 
FOR EACH AUDITIONAL 
INSERTION, ADDITIONAL 
WORDS 10 CTS. PER WORD 
PER INSE2TION. 


$2 


Replies are awaiting at our 
offices for Box Nos: 808, 3810, 
319, 45, 346, 347, 348, 


WANTED KNOWN 


HAVE YOU shopped at Bene 
Street W.1." 7 


oe 
‘ ' 


DUPLICATING SERVICE, AU 
classes of Duplicating work dong 
accuratelys and quickly. Mode- 
rate Charges, NIAGARA 
DUPLICATING SERVICE, 3rd 
floor, Chater Road, Tel. 26774. 


NEW Winter Sulting—Style and 
workmanship Kuaranteced to your 
satisfaction. Selected range of 
English = materials. Telephone 
21366 for tailor to call—King's 
(Ah Yan) Tailor, 4, D’Agullar 
Street, lat Floor, 


FOR ‘YOUR BREAKFAST, 
Tiffin, Afternoon-Ten & Dinner. 
YouFare welcome. Prompt Ser- 
vice. = Alry and Quiet. Try 
Cafe de Luxe, Chinn Empottum 
Mezzanine Floor Tel, 26428, 


WANTED TO BUY 


a ne 
ARTISTS Quality: Watercolours 
wernted urgently, Can anyone 
sell or lend few of good make 
new oor partly used, Box 340 
“China Mail’, 


FOR SALE 


UNDERWOOD LATEST 
MODEL just arrived, Lowest 
price. Also Typewriters for rent, 
Service guaranteed. Tel. 275682, 
Universal Typewriter Co., 22 
Des Voeux Road, C,, Ist. floor, 


' BOSTON -q 
STEAM LAUNDRY 


BEST SERVICE 
MODERATE PRICES 


\ 31B, WYNDHAM sv, 


Sy 


ey 


..  PEIPING & TIENTSIN 
WOOL CARPETS 


WHOLESALE 
.OR RETAIL 


CHI HING HONG 


65 Queen's Road Ast Floor, 
Telephone gies 
- HONGKONG 


tt A 
mM MN Pe: 


THE GOLDEN GATE 
PRINTING PRESS 


QUALITY job printing 
every description, 
‘Visiting § cards, 
Die stamping, Booklets, Balance 
sheeta, Envolopes and Office 
‘ suppiles. Copper, Rubber, Horn 
“7 & Ivory stamps maker. 
aa | 


of 
Letterheads, 


“« 44 D’Agullar Street, 
Hongkong. Telephone’ 88485. 


S 


ee en 
- SIE KEUNG | 
PRINTING PRESS 


" NEWSPAPERS | 


HONG KONG 
TELEPHONE 27608 | 


“When you. “buy. or 
“need servic 33 


Copperplates,. 


rte, 


27 LYNDHURST TERRACE 


_ LAMMERT BROS. 


Auctioneers, Burveyors 
und Appratrers, ¢ 
Building. © 
Telephong No. 202% 
PUBLIC AUCTION 


‘The Underalgned will sell 
by Public Auction on 


Wednesday, the 81st. 
December 1947 


commencing at 10 a.m. 


at their Sales Rooms, Pedder 
Bullding, Basement 


A LARGE ASSORTMENT OF 
VEHICLES, AERO ENGINES 
‘AND STORES 


Located at R. A. F._ Disposal 
Site, Mataukok Rond, Kowloon, 


Sea Transport Office, Welling- 
ton Barracks, Hong Kong. 


No. 7 Store, H.M. Naval Dock- 
yard, Hong Kong. 


Naval Store Shed, Taikoo Sugar 
Refinery, Hong Kong, 


N. 8. Maln Office Compound, 
H.M. Dockyard, Hong Kong. 


China Fleet Club 
Hong Kong. 


Compound, 


Full Particulars and Terms | of 
Sale as per — advertisement 
published on 27th, 28th. and 
29th. December 1947. 


'LAMMERT BROS., 
Auctioneers, 


: 


PUBLIC AUCTION 


The Underslgned have received 
instructions to sell by Public 
Auctlon on , 


Saturday the 8rd January 10948 

commencing at 10.45 a.m. . 
at thelr Sales Rooms, Pedder 
Building, Baaement 


A LARGE QUANTITY OF 
MISCELLANEOUS GOODS 
comprising :— 


White Shirting, 
Bara, .Galvanized 
and Plates, - Iron 
Truck, Machinery Parts, 
Plates, Galvanized Wire, 
Plates ‘and Hooks, Bolts 
Nuts, Round and Square Bars, 
White Powder, Zinc Oxide, 
Dyes, Paint, Black Liquid, Rub- 
ber, Paper Glass Bottles etc. 


Copper Flat 
Iron Sheets 
‘Ware and 
Tin 


' On yiew-on-day of: Sale. 


» Terma: 60% of the Purchase 
Money on Fall of Hammer and 
the Balance by Monday: the 6th 
January 1948, 


LAMMERT BROS,, 
Auctioncera. 


FOR SALE 


TENDERS: ore invited for the 
purchate of surplug vehicles. 
plant, scrap, etc. now lying in 
HLM. Dockyard, Hong Kong. 


Applications for particulars and 
Forms of tenders may be made 
IN WRITING to the Superin- 
tending Civil Engineer, H.M. 


Dockyard, Hong Kong, not later,’ 


than 
1948. 


Tenders will be required to be 
submitted not later than Friday, 
16th Januaty, 1948.'- 


Tuesday, 6th January, 


ST. JOHN’S 
CATHEDRAL | 


(Garden Road) 
New Year’s Services 
Bist. DEC. 1047. 


11. 20 “pant. ‘Watchnight Service 
Sung Eucharist. 


| JANUARY, 1948. 
"oad of. the Circumelsion, ° 


7.80 ‘am. ‘Holy Communion (in 
Ce English) 


18.00 am. Holy Communion (in 


os Chinese) 


| Service Auction Rooms 


Auctloneors, Barvarers, 
Saeamionk, Peas ch Bank’ Bile. 
AEB. ‘de French Auctioncer 

F “Talephons 81867. 


ar HANG JEWELLE RY 


The 


ete) 


ANT 


THR: OHINA- MAIL, - WEDNESDAY; DEOEMBER!Sf Loarisio 


B.B.C.. RUNS INTO” TWO 


IN THE SUPREME 


SENATOR |g 


HONGKONG » SORTS OF TROUBLE [EFT HK. ae 
PROBATE : London; Dec. 29. 7 
JURISDICTION The British Broadcasting Company’ faces an en- vy 


nt crisis y because of its. refusal 
to carry advertisements. \ 


VERY HURT 


Free Trip 


IN .THE GOODS _ of 


LEXANDER CHRISTIE 


-Tho Theatre Managers Aago-| gramme printed in.. “Radio} Phili ‘Senator Jose 
INTON late of No 3 ] ° N. Wie ilippines Senato 
elation, which controls the ac-| Times” which it publishes. 
Beltran ends oe MONE THAN tho” SINGLE tivitics of most of the, best} Theatre managera contend, Topacia Nueno left ene. 
AND WOMEN 


Kong’ yesterday 
Manila with sore. feel- 
ings and a determination 
to obtain redress. from 
the China National Avia- 
tion Corporation for}. 
what ‘he described *as| 4...0u0 avo 

“physical. and mental). sccite eater fone : 
suffering.” Se Sees . 

On the eve of his doparture 
by air for the Phillppincs capi- 
tal, Senator Nueno ‘said that he 
was determined to sue the cor- 
poration for damages smount- 
ing to US$50,000 through ita 
Manila office. 

He said he had beon, greatly 
{nconvenienced in China by :the 
mindirection of his four suit- 
cases from Manila, — 

He explained that when he 
arrived in Amoy from Manila 
on December 10 os a member 


known performers on the Brl- 
tish stage, has: announced the 
intention to: withdraw its 
artists, starting on January 1, 
unless the BBC gives radio re- 
cognition to the manager hold- 
ing tho artist's contract. 

This has been done in the 
pant by stating ‘on the alr “so 
and so appears by kind pormis- 
ston: of etc.” Now tha BBC 
wishes to restrict thess ackndw- 
ledgments to the ofMfclal pro- 


tals ond hostels and the men will 
go to htstels or: a camps.-~ 
Reuter, 


however, that film, organisations 
and stars, are “cotistantly receiv~ 
ing such acknowledgments and 
that they want the same pri- 
vileges, * 

This is not the only headache 
facing the £10,000,000 o year 
broadcasting company to which 
alt British radio and television 
set owners pay a licence fee of 
£1 annually. 

Frederic Dambman, o mild- 
mannered man whose only re- 
semblance to ‘America’s James 
C. Petrillo’ is that he also heads 
a Musicians Union, has posed 
another problem. 

Unlike his trans - Atlantic 
counterpart, Dambman rarely 
makes dragtig demands on em- 
ployors of musicians and even 
more rarely backs them with 
threats of strike action, . But 
his Christmas present was a 
demand for an increase for cer- 


MEN EMI- 
GRANTS SAILED FOR _ NEW 
ZEALAND IN THE LINER AT- 
ae FROM HERE YESTER- 


Sanltary Inapector, decens-|M. 
ed. x 


NOTICE 18 HEREBY GIVEN 
that the Court has by virtue of} 2: 
Section 68 of the Probates 
Ordinance 1897, made an Order 
limiting the time for creditors 
and othera to send in thelr claima 
against the above catate to the 
17th day of January 1948. 


All Creditorg id others ore 
Accordingly hereby’ required to 
send their claims to the under- 
signed on or before that date. 


Dated the 20th day ef Dec. 
1947, 


i Thelr ages were priweek 25 
and 30. 

They were the first large 
group of British emigrants chosen 
by the New Zealand Government 
and are mostly ex-service men 
and women who will pay no fare. 
All have jobs to go to. 

No married emigrants are go- 
ing to New Zeoland at present 
because of the shortage of housts. 

The women now . travelling. 
will Uve in nurses’ homes, hosp!- 


China Urged To Be 


Cautious: 


WILKINSON & GRIST, 


Solicitors for the Admintstrator 
of the cntate of the sald deceased 


No, 2 Queen's Read Central, 


Hong Kong. Shanghai, Dec. 30. tain types of programme. . Hel or , Philippines Goodwill Mi 
: : wants musicians in theatres Ppines Goodw: Be 
Influential Chinese are urging the Chinese Gov- whore shows are brondcast—a taltancea "Wen "eon nuedlnested 
emment to stay away from any Japanese jregular BBC feature—to be piibonves hae 
NOTICE peace conference in which Soviet Russia is | nid the aamo £2 or “3 they ig iB 


As a result, he could not make 
any eocial or official calls ir'the 
Chinese’ port as he possessed 
then only the kakhi.unifprm he 
wore when ka left Manila, 

It was not until a-week later, 
he added, that he was informed| © 
that hia sulteaeos wore’ waiting | Wo MORE DULLLOOKING hair now, thanks 
for him in Shanghai. to Vaseline” el aay 

Because of this-delay, His} helped bm... can bs hell yo too. Oe too, Gre 


programme in China was upset brani ade caylee cate on 
Hair Tontc boitatas 


and he hag to cancel -his visit} dandruff, wo. ‘Vaseline’ 
to Nanking and return to the tae wl ine er ne 


not participating. 

Thin view in set forth in an 
unusual article appearing in the 
liberal “Ta Kung Pao" algned 
by .62 persons, Including news- 
paper editors, pankers and busl- 
nersmen. 

The “Toa Kung Pao” has a 
record for independent thinking. 

Owned by the — Political 
Sctence clique of the Kuomin- 
tang of which Premier Chang 


woulg roceive if. they travelled 
to the studio. At present they 
receive 128. Gd. extra per broad- 
cast, ‘2 

If the “strike” goes into effect 
on January 1, the BBC will 
have to find 12 hours a week 
of entertainment to replace the 
theatre broadcasts alone, This 
will involve’ the costly use of 
live talent since the Musicians 
Union already hag on agree- 
ment limiting the number of 


ant influence on tho govern- 
ment. 

China's suggeation: is that the 
preliminary gathering should 
include the eleven aations con- 
cerned in the war with Japan, 
subject to ‘America, Britain, 
Chine and Ruasia exercising 
virtual veto. This representa o 
compromise between the ex- 
temes offered by the Sovict 
Union on one hand and the 


THE HONG KONG, 
CANTON & MACAO 
STEAMBOAT .. 
‘COMPANY, LIMITED. 


Notice To Shareholders 


NOTICE is hereby given that 
the ONE HUNDRED and 
TWENTY THIRD ORDINARY 
MEETING of Shareholders in 


C Chun {5 head, it also is a round- Philippines, with massage before every. chem 
the Company, will be held at} ing board on occasion for Nan- Americans on the other, recorded programmes. : te elvry double ears 9 both walp fair 
the ‘Office .of tho: .Company,| king. The article warns China not] Theatre managementa aware etal Nueno holds the rank + and It's economical, too, . 
Queen's Building, —- Victoria, to be hapty. in concluding a} of the tremendoup advertising : 


He fought with the Ripino 


xuerilla forces during tho’ war 


The article, which asks the] Japa pemec but to wait for a 


Hong Kong, on Monday, 12th 


value of u show broadcast are 


Vaseline 


Januar 1948, at NOON. for major powers to accept the Chi-| more “opportune moment" be- considering paying the extra Ss erenern 
the Bueheke of receiving a Re-| nese Government's proposal for] fore calling the conference rather | fees themselves, nahin ie ge ate in the 
port of the Directora, together|® Prellminary peace conference| than surrender any of the prin- ppines. io js a lawyer by 


Meanwhile; Dambman has in- 
dicated that”there might be a 
sympathy “strike’ in Britain 
against recording companies if 
Petrillo carried out his threat 
to halt recordings in the United 


profession. 


ig espectally algnificant because 


with a Starement of Accounts in 
: Shanghai leaders, have tmport- 


respect of 1946 and Re-electing 
Directors and Auditors. 


By Order of the Board of 


aples China 13° insisting on.— 
Associated: Preas. : 


Fiancee Shot Dead 


Usod by more men teday 
than any other hale tonje ; 


Obtainable at all leading’ 


Belgrade,” Dec: 30. 
A priest, three nuns ond, nine 


Directors, States, to prevent records made 
in England from being shipped 
Tee os to the Uniteg States as strike- 


espn) 
breakers.—United Press, ey ‘Peas 


In Xmas Tragedy 


London, Dec. ne 
Richata Stanley Morris, 30, of Bridle Road, Stan-" 

ree, accidentally shot his 29-year-old ‘fiancee. 
ae Marriott on Christmas Eve when he 
produced a revolver as a joke. 


At ahi inquest a verdict of; The police stated ' that tho re- 
accidental death was récord:d. [volver had a very, light trigger. 


Hongkong, 24th Dec., 1947. 


. 
an oo 


ENGINEERING 
SOCIETY OF 
HONG: KONG 


~ HIGH SPOT FEATURES. 
of the Neo 


MEMB: MBERSHIP ia a pes very, its. —Reuter. . 5 
if 5 . 3 
APPLICATION FORMS | ve, his ‘birthday, fis Marriot!| ~— SMALLPOX "I AeS+R LUXURY LIGHTER 
wont with him into his parents’ POX. ‘IN — 
Pegi eee a forse to AN the children's stock LEBANON . 


Baghdad, Dec. 20. 
Anti-smallpox vaccine sufficient 
for 200,000. dosots was ‘today sent 
from Traq to help combat an 
epidemic -of emjallpox in the 
Lebancn, 
The Chief Health OiNicer of the 


ings 

here were about a dozen 
pecple in the front room and his 
mother brought in a_ cockere! 
which they were « having for 
dinner. He produced on six~ 
chambered revolver which had 


evinced their desire to join the 
3oclety) do nor need a proposor 
or seconder they should merely 
complete the remainder of the 
form and send it to the Hon, Sec. 


THR SMART SEW MGHTER, 


: THE AN 
THAT IAS BRERYTHING _IN THE H py’ 


‘NEW Renna 
‘sie aecotcdsbctestea diate 


c/o Metropolitan-Vickera Elee-| pb nt to hi d tingl , 
foieel Export Co.," Ltd., Holland said? ww This Is "to keep et Mosul district of Northern Irog aoa ttreamiined for easy opening, nd 
House. thieves away.” has issued on appeal to tho na- | epilling. Fineline leads write smoother, 
: He then filled the Pe ari tion, atinteinorulsbon pre “  ecsslor, blocker... satafaclony sorien 
ith tridges and ose! e a In lation 41 tipt - 
mi Pe ’ “ee aay revolver. and was ab-ut to|cholern, casts ‘of which have eyo f im 
(Hon, Gecrelary “break” it: again to remove the|rccently been. reported from Syria Obtainabl . 
cartridges when it went cf. The closing of Iraq's borders sat P os ; 
Miss Marriott, who was sitting adjoining Syria and. perkey nas leading stores; 
A hair about four yards} been ordered and rajl and roacy], . 
* NOTICE sway, Mexclaimed: “You Shave tfraMic suspended. until’ further UNIVERSAL BALES , ‘ 
gct me.” He thought she was|notice. (Cc hina) Ino, ae by ‘ 
1 “gaming” so he put his arm| A’ ban has also. been placed on _— 
bia ia peor in bese around her neck but she collapsed ei) ster of nomadic tribes, Solo Agents: ; f ne 43, French Bank Bulldiig. 
nouncing thot we have been) and died, | —Reuter, % : 
appointed Sole Agents In Hong > THE ORIENTAL TRADING, oy) . LTD. ‘Phone 84194' 
Kong for I. & R. Morley Ltd. | 0 ___ d ee Agents. for: 


f 1 Wood Street, London, Room 1, French Bank. Building.’ 
3 00 , : oe 


from Let January, 1948. 
For JOHN D. HUTCHISON 
& TD. 


P. §, CASSIDY, 
Managing Director. 


Hongkong, 31st Dec., 1947. 


as 


D. sermons. & .CO.,: INC. 


: Outstanding Success 


a dl = 
Masil Ee 


Endorsed by Thousanils < 
‘enthusiastic, use} 


DELIGHTED. USERS EVERYWHERE ARE!L Rt 
FROM PERSONAL . EXPERIENCE. ALE 
TONAL ADVANTAGES OF 

- - FOR THE RELIEF OF DAN 


“Aloatt" tablets contain the normal. supply 
“quality aspirin’ plus * vi 
stomach sedative. Ales ; 
aspirin will do and MO. ‘ 
This special ‘sctentific combination of spel ond ‘Alsi "|. 


kes ‘Alasil’ tablets accept 
thore 7 Than halt cae ; 
MI 


“NOTICE 


a la, 


Notice ed hereby given 
that! t 


DELTA * “COMPANY 
KEPT) 


of Whiteaway Laidlaw. Bldg., 
» ‘Is in no pind connected 


creer tT HAT) 


of Des Voeux Road. 


those with sonsitive digestions. 
penne qualities of the ospirin'more effecti 


; " NOW. AGAIN AVAILABLE. AD 
2 ~ rican STORES & HOTELS. | 


pi by vou end ee 
Waal” loop By: 
why | thousands : 


“son dgents:— 


AT 280, 6.15, 
7.20 & 9.80 P.M. 


amt =.  M-Q-M’s BIGGEST TECHNICOLOR 


“SPECTACLE! 


TO-MORROW 
* 5 SHOWS ON NEW YEAR'S DAY * 
11.30 A.ML, 2.30, 5.15, 7.20 & 9.30 


8 PPT TTL SO TEE HCCTE HII mE TTL, 
me She Sings! 
w ppINrcazon! Sho Dances? 
Vi She's Terriftc? 


| . fin i cee 
oF WORT 
- Down to 


ey +, 


HARG PLATT AOLAKO 
EDMARD EVERETT HORTON ADELE JERGENS, 
GEORGE MACRCADY-WILMM FRAMLEYS 


. ANY : 
BOOKINGS NO 


AT 2.30, 5.1° 
- 716 & 9.16 p.m 


TO-DAY, 
ONLY 


The Immortal Romanee of England's Man 
Of Destiny! 
John GIELGUD * Dinan WYNYARD 
A Warner Bros. Pieture 


‘OPENING TO-MORROW 
(3) FIVE SHOWS 
AT 11.30 A.ML; 2.30; 5.00; 7.20 & 9.40 P.M. 


GARY COOPER® INGRID BERGMAN 


in EDNA FERBEA'S 


SARATOGA TRUNK “se 


“BOOKINGS NOW OPEN! 


with 


ame 


me 
K FRANK BUCKY, 


etth lomes Od, Daneaidszn ond Uhguel Rejlerty  Comemertary By Test Lesees 
Alaytale Predecton - Selaaced Thru UHITED ARTISTS 


ORIENTAL 


Commencing To-Day: At 2.30, 5.15, 7.20 & 9.20 P.M.| 
HERE'S THE GRANDEST ROMANTIC PAIR.... IN THE 


* SWEETEST MUSICAL OF THE YEAR! 


“DIAMOND HORSESHOE” 


Special Morning Show To-morréw At 12.30 P.M. 


' , THE CHINA MAIL, WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 61, 1947. 


Truman Signs. Emas 
Objections To. 
Restrictions 


: Washington, Dec. 29. ; 

President Truman today signed the Republican- 

sponsored anti-inflation bill passed by the re- 

cent special session of Congress. : 

In a stinging rebuke, President Truman said he 

"would sign the bill because it: contained some 

measures needed now, but complained that it 

contained only three minor points from the 

10-pointsanti-inflation programme , which he 
recommended to Congress in November. 


business, Industry and agricul- 
‘ure ..to. comply, and anid: 
“Every effort will bo made, of 
jourse, to achieve whatever re- 


Asserting that nearly every- 
one in the nation was fecling 
‘the pressure of exorbitant 
prices, President Traman said: 


“This bill fails to include key | sults are possible under thi 
measures which are essential to |-aystem of voluntary agreements. 
nn. effective anti-inflation pro- “It [a far too late in the 


fight against inflation, however 
to place our main icliance upon 
veluntary action.” 

He appealed to Congress, 
when it reconvenes in January 
to,enact promptly an effective 
anq workable programme” to 
zsmbat Inflation. : 

President Truman gave de- 
tails of the rise in prices’ sinc 
ne addressed the special ses- 


gramme. Thia bill will not re- 
duce the high cost of Iiving, 
nnd it will not keep prices from 
seoing even higher.” 

Saying that he would sign 
the bill with “deep = disnp- 
pointment™ becaune of fits in- 
adequacy, President Trumar 
warned that) “inflaticn and 
the high cost of living con- 
front the American people— 


all the American people—} sion of Congress on November 
with a grave danger.” 1%. “When 1 apoke to Con- 
gress, a pound of butter in 


Washington coat 88 cents, Las’ 
week, here in Washington, but- 
‘er reached a new high price 
‘of one dollar and five cents.” 


Interference’ 


Denouncing the interference 
with the powers of the Presi- 
dent, Mr, Truman said: ‘An- 
other part of the bill which 
gives me ycreat concern is sec- 


‘Snap Back 


tion six. This ‘section proposes Republican Jeader Charles A. 
that the President submit te] Halleck and Chairman Jesse P. 
Congress extremely detailed} Woleott of the Hodae Banking 
and specific recommendations| Committee snapped back that 
for mandatory ang conservation] the Dill, together with the 
measures for searce commodi-| powers the President previously 
ties, held, ts adequate to bring 


“Presumably Congress would 
then determine in each case 
whether the conservation mea- 
suies proposed by the President 
should be adcpted and what the 
details of the measures should 


prices, down. 

Senator Wolcott added: "If 
prices are not brought down it 
will be the fault of .the Presi-' 
dent and not Congress.” 

Senator Joseph Ball said the 


be, and pass legislation au | President's statement looked 
thorising them to be put inte|“pretry strongly like police’ 
effect. and Senator Halleck sald the 


President was trying to revert 
lo “radical New Dealism.” He 
blamed the “disastrous loose 
fiscal policiea of the ndministra- 
tion” for high prices, 
Democrats generally alde 
with Mr Truman in denouncing 


“It has long been an estah- 
lished practice for Congress to 
enact regulatory = menasures ir 
general terms, leaving it to the 
administrative | agencies. to 
determine when the measures 
shoulq be applied, on a basis 


of standards and conditions} ‘he — Republican antt-inflation 
established by Congress. bill as inadequate—Reuter and 
“This has proved to be a| United Press. : 


practical and werkable system. 
Section six of this bill now pro- 


poses aubatantially to revorae}. e 
this historia process." : Foreign 
Far Too Late 


The President also denounced 
the bill for refusing: to give the 
Eaceutive the power tu compel]: 


Escape 


Ten ‘members of 


TAR 


Phone 58335 


Marechal Joffre, 
safely reached Si 


, 2:30, 5.30, 7.30 & 9.30pm. 
TO-DAY ONE DAY ONLY 


be taken 


‘The French authorities here, it 
was understood, unsuccessfully claim: 


the Legionnaires deserted while the 
xhip was in port, they would have 
had to be returned to the ship. : 

The Malayan Department of Im- 
migration Is considering whether the 
men, six of whom are Italians, two 


should be returned to their birth: 
place, their country of citizenship, or 
ty the port of embarkation—Oran. 

The Legionnaires disclosed that 
they were three days adrift on a raft 


water to drink before they were pick- 
ed up. ‘ 

‘The escaped . Legionnaires alleged 
thot life in the Legion was “inhuman” 
and that a few men who tried to 
ercape from the Marechal Joffre in 
the Mediterranean into Spanish 
Morocen were recaptured and ehot 
after severe punishment, 

The cscapees added that they be- 
Weved that acven other Legionnaires, 
who jumped from the ship in ° the 


‘GRAND OPENING 


: TO-MORROW. - {Malacca Straits, were drovened. 
“HEAVEN CA% WAIT" Tank. Disserach, '|.a 27-year-old 
starrag Swiss from Calais, said that he woe 
(jer0 Tierney & Don Ameche spending ‘s holiday in France when 


fie got drunk and, on waking ‘in the 


A SANE™ 


C 


Dogs To Used 


the French Foreken Legon be 
j dl ‘bo: rom the Frenc pship, 
Marechal Joffre “pound for Indo-China, and 

tervi day that they ha 
i in Ww y at they 
“shanghaled” into the Legion and: would not 
back into it alive. ns 


ed custody of these men. Legally, had Le. 


Swiss, one German .and one Dutch, 


without food and with only rain- 


“BETTER THAN NOTHING” | 


ulated Inflation Bill. 


Japanese 
Get Life 


Sentence 


.Ipoh, Dec. 30. 

A British War Crimes 
Tribunal, sitting in Tai- 
ping, has‘found three of 
four high-ranking Jap- 
anese officers guilty of 
using a Chinese. political 
prisoner as a “guinea 
pig” in their experi- 
ments with what is 


Dumps 
Singapore, Dec. 30. , 

British Army authorities 
in Singapore propose to uso 
qwar dogs to guard supply 
dumps against looting. 

They have applied to the 
War Office for 50 dogs, of - 
A'satian blood strain or Al- ' 
satian mixed with tho 
Labrator or Collle strains. 


India’s 
Air Force 
In Action 


NEW DELHI, DEC. 29. 

RIAF PLANES ATTACKED 
POSITIONS TAKEN UP BY 
RAIDING TRIBESMEN IN 
‘THE MIRPUR KOTLI AREA 
AND STRAFED THE RAID. 
ERS ON THE URI ROAD. 
THE INDIAN DEFENCE 
MINISTRY SAID IN_ TO- 
NIGHT'S COMMUNIQUE ON 
THE FIGHTING IN 
KASHMIR. é 

Ammunition dumps were aln 
destroyeg by air bombing. In- 
dian army troops shelled con 
centrations of raiders, inflicting 
cnsnalties, the communigue 
atded. : 

Patrcls using mortars engag 
edn party of raiders, who were 
carrying away loot and 200 cat. 
ve southweat of Deripatam. 

Jn Bombay, two platoons of 
Indian troops, with Sten guns. 
wore stationed at known storm 
centres in the industrial north 
cf the city and a third stood by 
at police headquarters, as the 
blggeat-ever one-day genera’ 
strike of the city’s~half million 
workers began ‘nt midnight— 
Reuter. 


UMBERTO FLYING 
TO EGYPT 


Lisban, Dee. 29, 

Prince Umberto, eldest’ ron of cx: 
King Victor Emmanuel of Italy, was 
expected to leave here by air today 
for Alexandria, where his father diced 
yenterday of a beart attack, 

The former Crown-Prince, who had 
been living in Portugal since hiv 
father went into cxile, first heard of 
Victor Emmanuel’s illness yesterday 
in a cable asking him urgently to yo 


“Ipoh” poison, a highly 
deleterious tree-latex in 
commn6 use among the 
aboriginal tribes of 
Malaysia. 


Major Honjo Hiroshi, Capt. 
Utsu Nomiya and Capt, Hokam- 
ada Toshiko wire sentenced to 
life Imprisonment, Col, Otsuburo 
Minoru who, it was alleged, gave 
the crder for the experiments. 
was acquitted. The prosecution 
alleged that the experiment was 
enrried aut to study the clfect of 
the “Ipoh” polson on the akin 
and blood of a hnman being. 
Prepared from the julce of the 
“Ipth” tree with other iIngre- 
dienta, mainly arsenic, and pos- 
sibly strychnine, scorpion, bee anc 
snake venoms, the polson was 
extensively ussd by the natives 
of North Malaya and the .iude 
man islands for painting the tips 
of blowploe arr'ws. 

The trio) lasted nearly o 
month, Witnesses, who had heen’ 
empleyces or prisoners of the 
Japanese at the Gal, established 
that of 20 prisoners in the con- 
demned cells,” Chan Pak was 
relected os being the fittest for 
the experiment. 

Marks found on the deceased 
later gave the imoression that 
ni had been drained from thz 
bedy. 
The sensational case had sim!- 
lar features to the medical ex- 
periment conducted by Naz! doc- 
tore in occupied Europe.—Reuter. 


NEW MOTOR TAX 


for the first time this year. 
All the old cars will continue 


to Egypt.—Reuter. to. be ‘“sxed_at 25 shillings per 
hovsepowes Reuter, 
. @ ; 
Pa MAJESTIC 
Drama [0-DAY ONLY 


Singayiore, Dec, 29. 2.80, 6.20, 7.20 & 9.20 p.m. 


in West Malaya, said 
been 


polite lock-up without ‘money or pass 
port, was recruited into the Foreign 


Rion, balmy tle 
Erich Dietsch, aged 20, of Zurich, thar'sheoven 
anid that he waa staying with friends 
in France when he was arrested ay 
an Wegal immigrant and given the 
choice of imprisonment or service in 
the Legion. . 


“Got Into Trouble” 


Gerard Mars, 9 20-year-old Dutch: 
man, from The Hague, said that he 
went to Marseilles to see a brother] - 
off for Batavia, Running out af 
money, he “got Into trouble” and was 
recruited imo the Legion. 

Peter Vichoff, 21, of Duesseldor!, 
a former corporal in the German 
Army, said that on being released 
from a prisoncr-of-war camp, he 
found that his parents-had beer |, 
killed, and his home destroyed, so he 
volunteered for two years in the 
Legion, but later found that he hao 
slgned on for five years, 

The six Italiane ‘said that they 
were attracted by French official of- 
fers.of work and, after being arrest- 
ed in Marseilles for illegal eatry, 
were given the choice of prison or 
the Legion.—Reuter, ; 


” Eddie 
NEW YEAR ATTRACTION 
“FIESTA” © 


locally known as _the}.é 


.* London, Dg, 29. . 

The new £10 flat rate car tax |- 
comes into foree on Thursday’ for.! &% 
all new cars and those registered: 


ADVANCE BOOKING OFFICE 
ST. FRANCIS HOTEL, QUEEN'S ROAD, CENTRAL 
Booking Wours: 11.00 a.m. to 8.20 p.m. Daily 


eae ReaiNg 
LEN AyGe 


Dae 
rtm 


ge ne ay tah em 
IN COLOUR BY TECHNICOLOR! 


UN COLOUR BY TECHNICOLOR! 
MORNING SHOW TO-MORROW AT 11.30 A.M. 
WALT DISNEY'S ; 


"THE THREE CABALLEROS” 
IN TECHNICOLOR! 
AT REDUCED PRICES! 


DAWY AT 2" GH 7076 SOOM. =| DAMY AT 27° 6!) 20 & SIEM. 
—— FINAL SHOWINGS TO-DAY — — 


ALL THE WORLD 


SHERIDAN 


EAGAN 


Oh A KEW WARKER BROS? MIT 
i 


* OPENING TO-MORROW * 


ALHAMBRA ‘|. CENTRAL: - 
. “GENTLEMAN 
“SARATOGA ‘FROM 
ARIZONA” 
TRUNK” IN COLOR 


At 2.80, 5.20, 
7.20 & 9.20 p.m.. 


ST 
© FIRST SHOWING IN. HONG KONG * 


ROUGH! DYNAMITE! TOUGH! EXCITING l 
Alan LADD * Brinn DONLEVY *¢ Veronica LAKE tn’ 


“THE GLASS KEY” 


—— GRAND OPENING TO-MORROW —— 
HE FIGHTS Linf A WILOCAT... LOVES LIKE AK OUTLAW! 


THE CHINA Mant, WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER @l, 1947, 


PICTURE OF THE 
_Don | rea 

, SCENE 

1 


Mrs. John Jacob Astor ap: 
peared in a New York night 
club the other evening with her 
Chihuahua, The dog wore a 
sapphire | necklace and a din- 


smond ring on cach paw. 
Mink conts for dogs can be 


CHINA MAIL 


pia ro {ANT Es Windsor House 
FRANS-ASIATIC AIRLINES... Editor-in-Chiet:—W. J. Kentes. 
Risa Business Manager: W. H, Nolloth 


NEXT FLIGHT: - Telephones: 
: EAOTS ceeeeesse reeves 24904 


‘HONG KONG TO MANILA ..,... Wednemday, 31st December | Reporters & General Office 32312 
HONG KONG TO BANGKOK......... Friday, 2nd January 


i caday, 6th January (four lines) 5 bought in’ nome stores, 

HONG KONG TO BANGKOK .......- Tuceaday a ace . On Ne eich 
For Passage and Freight apply to:— *‘ ubseription: Rates: ; the cost of living. The price of 
3 months H.K.318.00 ; eles poms ie eet, 
u AM Btd fo ‘ rom 7s. Gd. to is, in Mon. 
SOUTH EAST ASIA ‘TRADING CO. (SI Eh BO inenthee cic H.K$36.00 . - , hatran. Nay peoples. can't 
ht Road Weat. Tol. 24292 ' : afford to shoot themselves or 

i One year ..,.... HE.S72.00 anyone e}se at these prices. 


The U:S. hns not become nyjrings, bracelets, olasps, and Taking about high prices, 
xlobal Santa Claua just to have | bangles aor anything from £100] many housewives - are adopting 
Its beard pulled by the Rus-|to £6,000 ure selling woll. the Now Look—they are wear 
signa, Three -more tugs by Ourrent issue of Time magn-} ing their fates longer. 

Molotov and this country will be} zine describes C. V. R. Thomp- Inflation has hit Hollywood 
In a mood to give up even com-|son, of the Dally Express, and | and the entertainment Industry 
mercial dealings with the} myself as “grab bag gossips." |where it hurts. Audiences, 
U.S.S.R. In a survey of the British} compelled to pay more for food, 

Here Is America, awathed in| Press it also saya that Ameti- shelter, and clothes, have cut 
{ts erlmaon Christmas closk.}can news rarely makes the|down their visits to theatres, 
lnden with gifts, humming affront pages of our newspapers | cinemas, and night clubs. 
carol and radiating good will,[ unless It is “such musicomedy Business has dropped 25-30 
and what happens? stuff ax the Hollywood heor-j per cent, in cinemaa and then- 

The Russlans plant time | ings.” Of course, tt ian'r  so.} tres iu New’ York, Washington. 
bombs among the presents on} out Time says it, and about] and Chicago. 


or FAR EAST AVIATION CO. LTD. ererevocoorceoeoooouere 
Top Floor, National Clty Bank of N.Y. Hidg Yel, 27260 " 


(Entrance on Duddoll Street). Kowloon Tel: 67185 - “| TRADE TROUBLES 


Britain's economic chief, Sir 
Stafford Cripps, whose respan- 
sibilities keep him constantly in 
nee ee ten ee rere the limelight is expected to utter 
A warning seon about an aspect 
of the struggle far recovery which 


4 «| has been — overshadowed | by the 
HE rahnce=- production drive, It is the prab- 
fem of selling abroad what Bei- 


(FRENCH OVERSEAS AIRWAYS) tain produces, the sleigh, feed poison to the 5,000,000 Amerienna who rend . ; 
The attainment of the export | reindeer, and hiss ineults in re- ne manazine will anes t The Lion’s Share von w then for the nat important. part of this holiday 
KONG/SAIGON targets is being hampered by im | ply to the Yule song, am getting rather tired 0 Plier lets tel 0 a y 
HONG /s port restrictions in foreign mar-| United States trade with | fending abuse of the British AT eet locturo—tha removal of the whita meat! 


Russin ts very small—not more} Press. Wo may have a little to 


kets. “Fhese barriers ate raised : 
WEEKLY AIR SERVICE because ‘hai foreign countries than 1.2 per cent, of America’s| learn from U.S. magazines in 
as at} It * Ttotal forelgn commerce. There technique and production, but 


ARRIVALS EVERY FRIDAY 2.00 P.M. are in the same position as Bri- are many here who think {ive have nothing to learn from Las Neen. Joltea by = coo] state- a: . ; 
DEPARTURES EVERY SATURDAY 6.30 A.M. | !2i-—having a chronically un-| vrngure of that trade might help} tHe American daily newspapers, | ment, from Bir Arthur Garratt | FQ ey Bay ogy e cenes 


favourable balance of payments, }ine Ruaslana to thelr senses. Lion, that no British theatre 


fast on the 76 per cent, tax im- 
posed on American films. It 


: and thus being compelled, simi- f n outright 
PIRECT CONNECTIONS FON CAIRO, PARIS, LONDON, |iN,"ty rearkt inate |aaatetne amore x the wi ctone for lnc, fi | 
ALL EUROPEAN CAPIT, , NORTH 80 AMERICA. Britain is engaged in, or is}no agreement on this and the ae bg er erat peer are n e ree ar 
FARE HONGKONG /PARIS £170-0-0. about to engage in, trade nego-|Goverument shies away  ner- not, ; ; 


tiations with some 25 countries. | vously even nt its mention, Sir Henry’ French, Director: B D | | WwW 
These include Russia—-Mr. Wil-|- About further — conferences. General of the British Film y oug as erner n 


THROUGH TICKETS ISSUED AND FREIGHT son's success in Moscow is a pre- | round-table meetings, and par 


leys with Molotoy, ‘however Producers’ Agsaoclation, who has ; 
, ACCEPTED TO ALL DESTINATIONS, liminary to further negotiations th af ‘ t Hoar unanimit he just left ‘here for England, has Military experts were hope- 2, There is too much poli- 
here Is y— atso helped to put the Amer:.|ftl today that the presence of|tical interference with. the 


in = May—Argentina, Canada} a morican public 1s “agin them.” 


Finland, Jugostavia, Brazil, Fire, cans right. He has told fitm{ American combat’ veterans as army. 


chlefa that Britain favoura q| advisers with the Greek Army] 8. There is no real offensive 


For Particalars Apply To “ 
CIE DES MESSAGERiES MARITIMES Peedi) roe Drumuay: ‘ ‘Fortune’ Ss Lap compromise, but that there is nu| would make 1948 the year of} spirit within the a¥my. 
All our negotiators can do is In New York we are on the These are, for the most part, al- burning desire to abolish the 75 vice. in the ne drawn re The ability of the gueritlas 
Queen's Building Tel. 26051 (three lines). to press as strungly as possible for | final lap of the Christmas shop- most Victorian in make-up and per San tax. came Men agains Ruerillaj{o travel back and forth across 
: i display. ob Hope, who can talk about|fcrees terrorizing Northern] the northern borders into Yugo- 
= a quantity of our non-essential | ping rush. It has, of course, ‘Anyway, better a grab bag nothing bur Britain since he re- | Greece. slavia, Bulgaria and Albania y. 


-broken all previous. records (it ti i et ‘ ; 
ornaip than a wind weeldy!| turned from London, bless him, Some observers American} almost at will has pro- 
always doc), and acing a koala bag Ady! is bringing Sid Field over here|and British as well as Greck—| vided the army with a 
day alone the aes eed Making the Count to co-star with him in a serleg of | {cel that by late next spring] serious problem. -There, ac- 
store did close to 1,500,000 dol- . ‘ American films. Bob is nlmost|zucrillaa should be whittled| cording to reliable officials, they 
Jars’ worth of business, : Sport continues to make New| deliriously enthuainstic about} down to the point where an] are able to obtain ammunition 
Prices are higher than ever,[ york newa. Joe Louts is deter-| Ficld’s talent. . estimate of .the probable end of] and guns and bring them back 
but shoppers are spending 6 peT| mined not to cancel his trip to] Mickey Rooney, who for|the costly campaign, tying up] into Greece. They got their 
cent .cmore may jben lant year) Britain. He blames his poor] years received less’ than £200 a suppHes needed by the elvilttan food largely by locting from 
for goods and gifts, , showing against, Jersey Joc; week while he starred in the| populace, is..possible. the countryalde, if the reports 
The toy counters have been} Wajcott on the “drying out pro-| Andy ‘Hardy. series and made| But this is admittedly an| received, by. the dally Greek 
busy, and the best and most ex-| cogs" he used before the fight] milllons for M.G.M., ts now got-| optimistic view since the gueril-| presk are any indication. ’ 
pensiye toys come from abrond.| ig pring down his welght. ~ |tlag over £1,000 weekly. las have shown remarkable Sealing Off. 
We have sent’ some magnificent} Walcott 1s now in the ' blg-} British-born George Sanders| tenacity in dealing’ with’ forces! : 
stuff—fine trains, , soldier, scta, I Ho ts asking YO}is bi ‘The problem’ of sealing off the 
puzzles: minature war’ weapona,| Ge ne or the wate at the 8 being  psycho-nnalysed In| which outnumber them 10 to} northern ‘borders has often been 
zz1es, "| per cent, of the gate at the re-] New York and {s enjoying the|cne, The guerillas — usually| discussed by*Greck ang Allied 


goods to be admitted at the same 
time as the goods which countries 
badly. need from us—heavy en- 
tinecring plant, clectrical plant, 
and high grade textiles in parti- 
cular, Greengrocers have been 
known to employ the same tech- 
nique. 

These world-wide — cconomic 
activitics are at once a Measure 
of our need and a warning that 

-| good — salesmanship, in which 
price is as important as quality 
and quantity, is essential if 


We a + : _ , turn match ar ‘the Yankee Sto-} process. Sanders is a more} i ightl 

slang pended here is to have World’s Fare dlum, and he will get a i piccesetal preastbreaker aven ae en ees iepealh oe ae ig Aatia 
$ . : : 3ene Tunney, already a mil-{than Errol Flynn, - _ 
As to the  Anglo-Russian I hate to talk about food,|ilonnire and one of the luckiest] Supreme toast of Broadway Ohh ne Aten hie ahora Effective sealing of the border, 


agreement, it will be easier to as-/ knowing your plight, but the re-/ men in boxing, continues to stubjand all New York ig Jessica »f about 120,000 and there are ae ae or 5 
power. 


‘ sess the true political and econe-| porting job must. be done.| his to mounds of doll 'Tandy— : 
TIME MEANS MONEY TO BUSINESS = |<‘ {05 js05 police! and ccone- ¢ over mounds of doltars.|'Tandy—remember her “at the| approximately 30,000 gene| Gree mua ampune of manpower. 


There ig every sort of food—pies,| Not only gold bur uranium ms Old Vic? Jesslea says she +t 
NON STOP FLI ment when the long term nego-| Puddings, cakes, meat, fish.| well has been struck on Tun-| hasn't had a hit like “A Street- See ee ieitian eran Hd that it suaht Be ata: 
ies 4 GHT tiations are concluded next May. by maintaining adequate guar 
' 1The economic survival of Britain 


fowl, game, spicea, nauces,|}ney’s estate in Canada. The/car Named Desire” : 
frult, chocolates, “candy, and discovery is [n the Tunney tradi-| “Children in Uniform” in ‘Lose tee ‘ey anti joan jforces at the principal | moun- 
: ° ‘ f i. confectionery, tion—he drips wealth. tion 13 years ago, ot . lain passes. ang other. crossing . 
Hongkong--Shang hat cou a witly eotenes. 2. And there is avery sort of All aroiind the town,—Aus- honierick for Tach? a ty leh hi ad ttn eat pointe ond. “hy planting. “mince 
vn ‘ as we may we can never escape| drink; cnough Scotch (26s. per|terity note, Furrier Al Teitel-! American producers are still| ou .® © its, operate atiached (0) around other more vulnerable 
{pot 2 that fact, and a large number of{ bottle), rye, Bourbon, cham-|baum has made a Christmas|turning handsprings trying to] °°” "¥ spots, But it is generally con- ° * 
Wednesday-- Friday--Sunda economists believe that if we can|pagne, Burgundy, brandy, rum,| tree out of white mink, using 67/ sign up Vivien Leigh for a Rebel Forays |eccdéd—that closing the border 
; y establish commercial relations| gin, and vodka to float the com-| mink sking in all, (Continued at foot of next column) Operating from mountain’) und keeping it closed {a almost 
with Russia and other -Eastetn| bined Anglo-American Fleets. o Po, : strongholds, some of which arc] an impossible job in view of 


D v 5; ; ica “Ovi It da reasonably priced and un- ; actually cutside Greece, the} the Jong, irregular border Mne. 
epa ture Hongkong 11.00 BeolM, | European countries over a long Db "1 “rebels” have | made continual Some observers believe that 


. period, there is a real chance that rationed. 
Pe ; ‘ Luxury — goods, jewelled BARCLAY ON BRIDGE forays into the plains area Of| much of the trouble with the 
FARE ‘H.K.$ 350 ON LY the. present political tensions will watehes. © fabulous — necklaces. _ | Northern Greece to burn and! Greck Army is that it. la i 


, be materially lessened. John wateal rt; ad forcibly en-] geeply « } 
Luxu riou Ss. A ir cra fe Gordon in the “Sunday Express —| . By SHEPARD BARCLAY ; ‘tet yOURE ian nt Hele nae no en Renee Lagercens 
( Stewardess Service 


cums up the situation when he : a The army has been unable to t 
Ste Fe “THE AUTHORITY ON AUTHORITIES’ stop them, In fact it has been Seat hee ve JAM exper fd ‘ 


says “From talks on Niet once . 
we begin to trust cach other.a 1060 i 4 fighting o purely defensive war.| take a better vi f the situa- 
little more and fear each other a Cars | COUNTING IS ROAD ns lef of Staft. Diowt 


South held up his honora. He! “the problem of how to put! tion, ‘The Chief of S 

i taff, Lieut, 
little less, we may well make an . MAP took the spade.Q with his K and) an end to the fighting has had! General. Constantin Ventiris 
advance to cooperation in the ‘ was removed and made com- 
wider field of world restoration.” 
Ld » \* g¢ 


mander of the army of North- 


: led the diamond Q to the A-! alited military experts—Ameri- 
Just as crosa-country mo! The third spade lead was won ae and Buttiah—-almost ae 


toriat uses a may to guide 


Oo ! | ni igi depot, 0 Mua dhe de nn oes ate: ee “they fel, shi | 7 SE He Wee, ronced 
a declarer often depend upon ee . by ut. nora! nstantin 
(FARE) card-counting to plot w course| ooente at, wis wage South| the winter’ in which to cruah| VYarjie ‘whe had headed the 


could count Weat for having] the guerillas especially. since 
held three - spades, aaa car winter Is coming on and the 
fee sbaby fi earta a there. | Talders will undoubtedly fare 
ti Fea: ably ‘Eig oh b much worse ‘in tho cold — than 
that this sult woutdn't break, * troops which are well clothed 
throw-in play againat West was| *"d well fed. eciggt a bat ed 
indicnted now, as otherwise only ae ead: , . 
in gabon She lee Renee eae “1, ‘The guerillas receive out- 
diamonds and: three in clubs. side help. 
South therefore raked in: the . 
dummy’s diamond 10 and three (Centinued from col, 9 picking on -him.” . 

club. tops, then led hls heart 6,|Uollywood film, but Lady, . ‘Poor Spirit 
When-West put on the Q, South| Olivier seems determised t0-89|  Opservers have also “noted. a 

pid ay om i ietitade -know- | to Australia with her: husband. lack of an offensive “apiiit with. 

x West would have nothing in the ‘army—the. 


Northern Grock Army. a. 

Ventiris is viewed og a good 
soldier and when the change 
teok place Premier’, Sofpulis 
commented that on him “will 
depend the salvation’ of the na- 
tion.” 

A high. American ‘spokesman 
commented: recently that. Ven- 
tirts probably will ‘do an excel- 
lent.job “If the politicians: stop 


which will steer him to attain- 
ment of his contract, Sometimes 
‘]it shows him a straight path to 
where he 1s headed and on other 
occasions it will tell him,to make 
a detour in order to avold dif- 
ficulties or dangers, The de- 
clarer who will not do it Hke q 
driver who just proceeds accord. 
ing to his sense of direction, pay- 
pee no »_attention to even tho road 


AMOY to..sesccBune Service Bxcept | BIKSI80.- 
CANTON | coe scomMon., Tues, Thors, & Sat.  3Be 
CRUNGKING .....8aturday  ..... 
FOOCHOW _........ Wednesday... 
KUNMING ......... Tues, & Thare, ..00 
LIUCHOW _ ........ Tues. & Thura, 

SHANGHAI verece Dally Bervice .... 
SWATOW sess as care 08, & Sat. . 


TAINAN _...........fon. & Thurs, .., 
FREE BAGGAGE ALLOWANCE 30 KILOS. 


Election Speculation : 
(From the files of the 


Despite statements by members "China Mail") ; 
ie ae A foes hi A scientific member of the Society 
time Minister down, that they |o¢ Fricnds has rendered the novel 
have no intention of going to the] material of gutta percha tubing sub- 
cauntry before the end of. the |servient to an important saving of 
Parliamentary. term, there are ou and footsteps in the domestic 

e, ae 

many ee tes neuaine, In consequence of the peculigr 
sonic ur mtn, who do not] power possessed by this tubing for the 
think the Government: will Jast transmission of sound, -he has applied 
the course. It for the > conveyance of messages 
$ .} from the parlour to the kitchen. Even 
Mea ae he angurmcntative, ques: a whisper at the parlour mouth-plece 


* | ta dintinetly heard when the ear fs : 
should a Government with a big epplied atthe ether ead. 


HONGKONG : OFFICES:— majority, and ita plans ‘for re-| Instead, therefore, of the servant left except hearts and would Message from Stars : incentive to chhg ‘tho guerillas 
: é KOWLOON covery in process, rick its life he-| having to answer the bell, as former- have to lead into the dummy’s Into the hills tathur: than :more- | 
Sholl House . Peninsula Hotel | fore it has to?” The answer to] ly. and then descend to the kitchen A-J for ho Jost two tricks. Incidentally, . the: moasage ly defend thé villages a 
Fels; —23278-2781) ; ~ his by the electi hets js {t2,bring up what te wanted, the mis- Different defense could have|{from Sir Laurence nod ‘Lady to the highways, "- 
‘ . d Lobby this by the election prophets is} reve calls attention by gently blow: -| bothered South, but as it went) Olivier “ond © 18. other: British }'* 5° jor, General ‘Wilijar. Live- 
ns RIBBS _ Tel. 5894N that it may have no choice. ing into the tube, which sounds 0 BAK, he was glad of he bid. screen Seok cone t- *h dof itary 
: f; use pdint to siune ot Seas shale ie v ie Hees, st then Ly 4 5 . “Ete ae jeastns steel ary, aes 
: : in Labour unity~to the fact that| makes known her wants to the ser: v . 
oP gee the | Governments mafveyon| Sg” tire sem oAK la aia s| ou can't ben gril with 
A the atest Order for direction of |” ny this means the mistress not only es South. - i , out adopting scme of thely own 
: ee labour was only’ 45 and, op ‘tle | necures the execution of her- order So th Wes ‘i iN rth ; oe tactics. It’s.a, lok Mke the. old ° 
decision to suspend the basic petrol} in half the usual time, bur the rer. rc lf Dbl wah ‘Indian - svattore | in”. ‘Athorlea 
GERM AN Cc AM ER AS Hohe only 27. oe, think. a vant is aaved © 4 double Peta gNT years ago when’ we: had: to go | 
trend may we accentuate : South’ takeout of the double cut after them.’* -- 
oe 4 “AVAILABLE HG when, under. sterner ‘administia- into a: ‘No Trump wt was due ‘Tho, eatimates ‘of: the. ‘bbe of 


| ws _. [tion by’ Sir. Stafford Cripps, the | bo: to the vutnerabil ty.- He reckon- a ’ ‘ithe. guorilia' fighting. fores' are 
: ey INE. GRAIN - ree ae fol blast, of f coming: aanerities is [0 van ta, ity. ed thet if Ate tas: be| D 943, Graclg Ficlde says ee ale 1 aid sari ‘Ganeaeaa not cone.” 
hee elt. ; : ; fat, has. act substan on a ner Amero 4 Puped. to. pe “Brita! cant alder Com- : 
“DEVELOPING &: ENLARGING BP ES ey { ; been sowed in. .fobie game murt'be in the cards]. . oo fay ta Britaln ‘¢an't havo it,” or Cott 
ee {for his ‘side fee ns 10.8. Q-4..-../ She intends: to-.eing: here : 
“Reveraysthe| | nn ea aS “Chump Shop cand 


* A dependable 
companion— 
your new 


Always ready for action, 
your Dodge takes you where 
you want to go, .. safely, 
effortlessly. ° 
The new Dodge's All- Fluid 
Drive can be counted on 
for constant driving case, 
You can drive all day with- 
out couching gearshift lever 
or clutchl 

Dodge's Power-Flow engine 
gives performancy that is as 


t 
steady as it is economical, 
( 
} 
i 
j 
i 
r 
¢ 
4 


Tests prove it actually aver. 
ages 26 miles per bnperial 
gallon! 


Why nor drop in end enjoy 
the new Dodge's Full-Float. 
ing Ride coday? 


THE CAR YOU WILL WANT TO ORIVE 


DODGE 


THE CAR YOU WILL WANT 10° O1tN muoud 


DODWELL MOTORS 
LIMITED 


SHOW ROOM 
1, Queena lig. 
Tel, 82802-82322 
SERVICE STATION 
6-7 Rosell St. 
Tel. 32808 


a 


way 


ae 


+ Lending cham, 


Berlin, Dec.-29. 


The two dismissed Christian Democrat leaders in 
the Soviet Zone, Dr. Jacob Kaiser and Dr. 
Ernst Lemmer, received an unanimous vote 
of confidence at the inter-zonal Christian De- 
mocrat and Christian Socialist conference, 


which ended in Berlin today, the 


German 


news agency in the British Zone reported to- 


night. 


Mourning 
For Jean 


Egal 


DEC. 80, 
FRENCH 


SHANGILAL, 
SHANGHATS 
COMMUNITY WENT INTO 
MOURNING TODAY FOR M. 
RODERICK JEAN BAPTISTE 
EGAL, FRENCH PATRIOT. 
WHO HEADED THE FREE 
FRENCH HERE AFTER THE 
FALL OF FRANCE, ON RE- 
CEIPT OF THE NEWS THAT 
HE DIED IN HONGKONG 

YESTERDAY, 


A veteran cf the first World 
War, M. Bgal was arrested by 
the French authorities here in 
Atigust, 1941, for hia efforta to 
rally ali Joeal Frenchnren to 
General) Charles de Gaulle'a 
standard, ang sent to Saigon. 
where he was imprisoned — for 
several montha before facing 
triad, ‘ 


He was sentenced lo six 
nonths’ imprisonment and de- 
prived oof French — citizenship. 


but was soon after, due to Bri 
tish pressure, “deported” to 
Singapore, 


short utny in 
continued hin 


During: his 
Singapore, he 
Free French activities, He was 
in Hongkong on the outbreak 
of the Pacific War and was ine 
terned there for the duration by 
the Jupanese.—-Reuter, 


: aN aii beauty combined with practical utility== 
cm that’s tha combination you get when you select desk . 
sets by Sheaffer's. Available now in a wide range 
~ of styles, sizes, “TRIUMPH” desk sets: invite mos? 
critical Inspection and comparison, Thelr large, cylin« 
dricat 14-K gold points glide smoothly and sitenily | 
* for completely relaxed writing. And there’s o type 
* of point for every style of writing. Primed tor instant 
+ detion, the point Is always mots), the socket always 
* dry. The tronsparent window wams when to refill, 
and elegance to home, office and 
«student roomy, “TRIUMPH” desk sets ore the pere 
fect choice for every gift occasion, = x 


— SHEAFFERS .. 
- OBTAINABLE av ‘ALL LEADING. STORES: 


UNIVERSAL SALES (CHINA) INC. aoe 
French’ afk: Bua a i 


ft 


“TRIUMPH. 
Deak Sete 


: ( ENHANCE ‘THE BEAUTY. 
ity OF EVERY HOME 


"F- Youcanreaily denitty the new "TRIUMPH™ 
dask satsiby the large, 14-K gold eyfindricol 
polnt which alr-seals into the socket in exoctly : 

_ ia vane. sey Hee porkal TEM Pet 
en not id con 


De, Fredeich Holzapfel, mayor of 
Herford and chairman -of — the 
Christian Democratic Union In the 


Hritish Zone, stated that no objection 
had been raised at the inter-xonal 
conference against their leadership 
of the party, neither against their 
work, nor against their objectives, 
Me added that the — Christian 
Demncrats attached great importance 
to ansuring the collaboration of both 
Dr, Kaiser and De. Lemmer ‘in thelr 
future wark, 

Leaders of the Christian Democrats 
in the British and Soviet zonen and 
leadérs of Christlan Socialists—coun- 
terpart in the United States Zone— 
sigtieed a resolution saying: ; 

“According to the first principles 
f democracy, representatives of a 
party are appointed or diamiaved by 
a meciing of its members, We state 
that Dr, Jacob Kaiser and Dr. Ernst 
Lemmer were elected as zonal 
chairmen by secret ballot at a zonal 
party gathering a few months ago, 

“They have the full crust: of the 
whole union, We hope thin fact will 
Setp overcome the difficulties. in 
‘he Saviet Zone.” 


Standing Firm" 


‘The outstanding point of tonight's 
resolution was that five ‘provinelal 
party leaders, of the Soviet Zone 
“oncurred in it. These men had 
stood firm in theie supportcof | Dr. 
Kaiser and Dr. Lemiher,: in npite of 
the disadvantage in which. they were 
placed through the geographical loca- 
ion of their homes and‘ families.! 

‘The resolution dectaréd ,that; the 
German nation has hardly fouling its 
democratic freedom since, the * 
lapse, “To safeguard, this. freglom, 
we still have to fight fot thé basic 
rights of free individual,’ !: and 
democracy, In “thin endexvour, 1 a9 
zonal frontiers can divide ‘us.’ 

It was announced that ‘efforts: to 
combine othe — Christian’: “Tbprograt 
Union and’ the :Chriatian , 'Saclalivt 
Union inte a single party ‘wopld be 
made at a meeting in: Frank uy, in 
January.—Reuter. 


cols }. 


DEFIANT. ‘GERMAN. LEADERS 


Standing Firm In Support OF Dr: Kaiser’ 
“Full Trust Of | 
The Whole Union” 


Bird Hat 
Snatcher 


Natrobi, Dec. 29. 

Villagers uring a narrow, 
forest footpath near Zanzl- 
bar became accustomed to 
having thelr hats snatched 
off by a mysterlous, unseen’ 
thief. Finally, a quick- 
eged victim cought sight of 
a olnrge bird making off 
. with hily cap. 

He followed it a short 
distance into the bush and 
watched while the — bird 
neatly hung his hat along- 
side 13 others—all in a pre- 
.cise row on the Iimb of a 
baobab tree —United Presa. 


MIGRATION 
TO BREMEN 


Berlin, Dee. 29, 

An “Industrial Settlement Com- 
miter" haw been net up in the north- 
west German port of Bremen in the 
United States Zone to examine re 
quests from Soviet zone industrial 
undertakings for permission to move 
to the Bremen area, it was reported 
here soday, 

The committee, which is giving 
preference to amall and medium siz- 
cd firms capable of being fitted into 
Bretnen'’s industrial structure, already 
has insucd settlement permite to 
radio, electrical and food manufac: 
turers, and is now examining = ap- 
plications from eaxtern zone = com> 
panles manufacturing export goods, 
it was stated, 

Today's repore came lest than a 
fortnight after the announcement in 
Frankfurt that more than 2,000 ‘n+ 
dustrial and merchandine firms in 
Berlin ond the Russian Zone had ap- 
plied to the Frankfurt Chamber of 
Commerce for perminsion to ‘move to 
the bi-zonal capital.—Reuter, 


Near In 


The Indonesian Republican Government will ac- 
‘cept a cease-fire truce with the Dutch in a 
letter shortly to be sent to the Security Coun- 
cil’s “good offices” committee, which put for- 

plan for a speedy and effective 

agreement in Indonesia, Republican sources | 


ward a ‘third 


said today. 
The statement “followed a 


ing of the Indonesian Cabinet at Jogiakarta, 
and the arrival here today of the Republican 
negotiating committee. 


The Republican acceptance of the 
plan waa understood tw be cunditlon- 
al, but it was believed that the letter 
would contain “helpful” suggestions. 

Dr, Lovin Beel, the Dutch Prime 
Minister, met Mr, Setiadjit, the In- 
donesian Vice-Premier, “on neutral 
soil” at the American Consulate Gen- 
gral here today. 

This was arranged by Mr, Charles 
Livengood, the United States Consul 
General, who provided a — apecial 
room for an informal talk, = which 
lasted one hour, about the Dutch-In- 
donesian dispute, 
The mecting, it is understond, 
was arranged with the knowledge 
of the United Nations Sccyrity Coun: 
cil's good oflices committee of — In- 
donesia, No official information has 
‘been given about the mecting, 

Dr, Amir = Sjarifuddin, the — In- 
donesian Republican Prime Minister, 
did not return with the Republican 
delegation, as he war ill and had 
urgent affairs to which he muat pay 
attention in the Republican capital, 
Republican sources said. 

At first It was thought here that 
tican de 


his absence from the Rep! 
legation indicated the 


.| turn Japanese trade 


Cease-Fire Truce 


bility of | 


Dy 


Jap anese 


T rade Rights 


Washington, Dec. 30. 


The U.S, Government. on 
January’ 1, 18 returning to the 
Japanese Board of Trade the 


direction of Jopan's international 
trade In sille and c'tton textiles. 

The action Is in conformity 
with the American desire to re- 
to private 
hands os soon as possible, and 
enlirges the scope of the Allied 
restricted private trading agree. 
ment on Japan made effectlve In 
recent menths, 

Bilk and colton textiles, ca 
pecially the latter, have proved 
the most proiitable In the effort 
to get Japan back on its cconomle 
fect. During the tlme the U.S. 
Commercial Ccmpany handled 
the business, it developsd from 
post-surrender zero to scores o’ 


milllons of ‘dollars. yerrly und 
further expunsit=n appears = im- 
minent if the needed row 


materials can be obtained, 
American and private agencies 
are at present trying to arrange 


cotton credits on bshalf of 
Japanese spinners. — Associated 


Press, 


ARGENTINE 
THREAT - 


Buenos Aires, Dec. 30. 
Acreliable trade aource told  As- 
sociated = Press today = that thr 
Argentine Gavernment has ordered 
all ment shipments to the United 
Kingdom to be halted after January 
7 unless Britain is able to arrange 
payment in convertible pounds, 


A British =mission at’ present 
negotinting in Buenos Aires has 
been informed of the government's 


attitude «and ts hopeful that an 
agreement can be reached before 
the deadline. —Associated Press, 


Batavia 


Batavia, Dec. 29. 


rast 


special week-end meet- 


Before he left here far Jogjakartn 
on December 22, Dr. Sjarifuddin 
wid that he would not return to 
Batavia until “real talks” on — the 
substantive political issue were ready 
to begin, * 

Dutch sources indented: yesterday 
that the Dutch delegation had ace 
cepted between 80 and 90 per cen 
of the proposals, 

Two Dutch soldiers and two In 
donesian civilians were injured when 
a bumb exploded here, it wie report: 
et soday, 

The bomb was thrown at a group 
af soldiers and civilians in the rey 
sidential part'af Batavia during the 
weekend, 

This was the third bomb explosion 
in the past few days, bringing the 
total eastaltics (uv two dead and 21 
injured.—Reuter, —* 


ee ee Ee A 


‘A BRITISH CROSS WORD PUZZLE 


General 
‘(Bourne | 
|For Burma 


London, Dec. 29. 

‘The appointment of 
Major-General G. 
Bourne as head of the 
‘British Services Mission 
to Burma was officially 
announced by the War 
Office today. 


Tall, 
years old, General 
nirendy left for- 
moat of his staff, 


The*Misaion will begin {ts of- 
fielal duties on January 4, the 


one-armed and 44 
day power Is tranaferrod to. the 
Burmese and Burma — becomes 
an independent nation outside 


Bourne has 
Rangoon with 


the Britlsh Commonwealth of 
Nations. 


During .the war, 
‘Bourne war o senior member of 
the Britteth Joint Staff Misefon 
to the United States for 18 
months, 


Afterwards he served in India, 


Jaya and Italy. Despite hia 
disability, which he sustained 
over 20 years ago, General 
Bourne in a keen tennis and 


racketa player.—Reuter. 


Italian 
Ships Escape 


ROME, DEC. 29. 
THE ITALIAN MINISTRY | OF 


THAT 13) MOTOR _ FISHING 
BOATS RECENTLY ROUNDED 
UP BY A YUGOSLAV WARSHIP 
IN THE ADRIATIC SEA HAD 
ESCAPED AND RETORNED TO 
‘THE PORT OF MOLFETTA, ON 
THE ITALIAN ADRIATIC 
COAST. 

Two other boats had been intern- 
ed by the Yugoslava at Lissa, on the 
Yugoslay Dalmatian coast, It was 
added. 

The boats were fishing off © the 
Yugoslav Ivtand of Pelagosa, in the 
Adriatic Sea, halfway between Italy 
and. Yugorlavia, when they were 
said to have been captured and im- 
pounded by Yugonlay ‘patrols on 
December 24.—Reuter, 


Soviet. Makes 
A Gesture 


Paris, Dec. 30. 

Almoat 60,000 tons of wheat, 
wood and motor fuel in repara- 
tions - from. Eastern Germany 
have been:-mado: available for 
the first time: by Sovict occupa- 


10 countries today, the e rene 
Ministry ‘announced, 

The announcement said ‘the|- 
allotment, wos, made at the 14th. 


parations Agency. 


Beneficiarlles will be Franes,| 


Belgium, . India, Holland, 
Greace, Czechostovakia, Yugo- 
slavia, Egypt, Britain and Am- 
erica, This is the first time 
Nuesia has carricd out her part 
of the Potsdam Agreement on 
exchanges of reparations—As- 
sotiated Press, ~ . 


a new hitch in the negotiations but}, 


members of the Republican delegation 
denied this s0 far as they were con- 
cerned, 


New Guinea 


Oil Quest 


Batavia, Dec. 30. 
Three oll companies have reaumed 
operations In‘-New Gulnea In a pro: 


great quantities of oil in’ Asta. 

They are Shell, Vacuum and the 
‘Celiforata-Texas companies, . which 
have consolidated for the venture un- 
der the corporate name of — the 


Netherlands New Guinea Petroleum 


Company. 
Alt 
heavily - 

Three 


Fels. being worked a 
-bombed during the wi 
fields io 


operations ‘and - 


paraffin’ monthly. 


L. Thiv te in excess of the: pre-war 
capacity, 


At. -Tarakeg, arhere. repalr 
vage work’ began’ In 1945, 
lls: have been réstored. | At 
rulned wells. have 


TT * wells. have” 


ject’that, may lead to 2 discovery of]. 


were 


to ‘a point where ‘they ste 
all 


been 


Borneo—Taraka, |: 
Louise and Sambodia—have: resumed 
“the end of: 1943 
are expected to be producing 100,000 
tons of keyosenc, gas oll, fuel oll and 


Clues Across 
3S Clergyman ‘18 Possessed. . 

& Sword, 19-Active. + 
9 Temperate. +'22'Coming ‘in. - 
11 Called. Secu eet 

12 Footwe 23K 


A 
Bparkled, 10; tne 4 Fi 
Stow, .17.:Feite: -in 

24 Revise 

28 Enoul, 


"as. Young hare. 
16 Blumbering. 


General]: 


DEFENCE ANNOUNCED TODAY |- 


tion authorities and allotted to] . 


session of the International Re- : 


STEAM NAVIGATION. COMPANY. 


ese, ARRIVALS _—_—.'.- 
sBIP 
“OZABDAT vais sscssen 
BANC ASITRE h 
seeee - Shanghai ih Jan. 
“EMPIRE BRENT — via: Biralts 7 2 gan. 
“DEVONSHIRE” isth fee. 
Sooke Asth Feb. 
ooTREVAYLOR® ry 
“DILWARA UK. Sith Feb. 
TREVAXLOR” NeoeeaUl, via Straits 28th Jan. 
SAILINGS <‘ : 
sHiF’ TO SAILING 
“LANCASHIRE” GR K, via Straits 48th Jan, 
TREVETHOE® Be Be a ae 
“EMPIRE BRENT” ..... Shanghai h Jan. 
“DRVONSHARE” Kure strat 16th Feb. 
SCAN ON one" re o UK, via Straits ira Reb 
“TREVAYLOR" 13th Mar. 


British India 


STEAM NAVIGATION CO., 


APCAR LINE 


LTD. . 


ARRIVALS 
SHIP FROM DUE 
“BANGOLA™ “Shonghal’@ Amey” 13th Jan. 
SAILINGS. 
SHIP TO BAILING 
eae oLA ae ed ngoon peaaires 
: Calcutta via Straits 18th Jan. 


Easter g Australian 


STEAMSHIP. COMPANY LIMITED 


ARRIVALS. oe 
SHIPS from Due 
“NELLORE” Australia end. Jan. 
saplodecak Karly March 


“NANEIN’ 1. 


For. full particulars epply tu 


MACKINNON, MACKENZIE & CO. 
; * Telephone Nos. 277214. : 


7 e ) SIERMay, 


STEAMSHIP A ct CORPORATION) 
: MOBILE, ALA..U.S.A: 


Expected arrivals from US. Atlantic Ports: 


as: “FAIRPORT” oe Duo 2nd Janusry 
8, “KYSRA” Due End January 


LOADING FOR NEW YORK via PANAMA 
bacco “FAIRPORT”. :........:.. about’ and January 
_For freight and further particulars sapply:— 


'WALLEM &- canon. 
Hongkong & Shanghat Bank Bids. 


w . . Chinese Erelebt. Agents: 
HIN FAT & CO. LTD. ° 
oo; Mhelt- BSBB. de 23483." sai 


danoeoreoes: 


oe Tae 1° 


= 


JAVA-CHINA- PAKETWAART LUNEN N. Vv. 


(JAVA-CHINA- PACKET LINES Ltd.) 
King’s Building Connaught Rend, 
Tel; Shipping’ Dept.-28016, Passage Dept. 28017. 
Chincas Agents, Connaught Rond, C. No. 82, Tel, 25188. 


as CHINA and JAPAN LINES 
“TJITIALENGKA” = Due from Salling for 
Amoy ’ Batavla, Sermarang, 
2nd Jan. Macassar é& 
. Soerabaya 
et Sth Jan, 
pn 
ip ES h 7 =~ Due from : Salling for ae 
"TSISADANE Jnva ports and Batavia, Semarang; 
Macnssnar ~ Macnassar & 
16th January Socrabaya ne 


31st. January. . 


ORIENT-JAVA-AFRICA LINE 
SOUTH-ATLANTIC LINE 
- Diie from i Loading fot 
0 South Ani janila, Singapore, 
TEGELBERG : Routh Arica Mauritius, 
4th Feb. 1948- Lourenco 
Marques, Beira, 
‘ Durban, East London, 
‘ : Port Elizabeth, . 2. 
¢ Mosselbay, Capstown; 
Buenos Aires, Monto- 
video, Santos, Bio - 
de Janelro. 
14th Feb, 
Transhipment cargo on through bill of lading accepted for 
Dar-Fs-Sataam, Mombasa & Zanzibar. 


Sonth America South Africa 
RUYS South Africa . South America 
29th Jan. 1048. loth March 1948 
nan 
“ South America, Shanghai, Yokohama” 
STRAAT —— Aftles,.. 27th Jam ona. -0 bs 
SOENDA” 25th Jan.- 1946, 


DELI-STRAITS-CHINA LINE 
Due from Sailing for 


“ 7” Helawan Dell, Birra: wre, Penang 
VAN HEUTSZ Penang, Singapore & #ctawan Dell 
i 17th Jan, 1948 . 2ith Jan. 1048. 
een Ne 
’ y & fimo; Singapore, Penan 
“HEINRICH hl 1948 ?. & Belawan Dell . 
JESSEN” Sth Jan, 1948, 


_ Agents HOLLAND-EAST ASIA LINE 
“LEOP OLDSKERK” ae Heda ditsapore / 


an or about ‘Culombo/ 
5th Jan. Port Said /Alexandrist 
Sailing for Genoa /Marscities / 
Shanghai & Antwerp /Rotterdam / 
Japan Amsterdam /Hamburg / 
‘Copenhagen / 
Gothenburg / 
Oslo, beginning of 
February 


SMGLENICEIO” Die from Loading for 
rope Mantla /Singapore/ 

at or about Colombo/ 

16th Jan, Port Said /Alexandria 

Sailing for Genoa /Marseilles / 

Shanghal Antwerp /Rotterdam/ 

& Japan aAmsterdant /Hamburg / 
Copenhagen / 
Gothenburg / 
Middle of Feb. 


Londing for 


“ALPHERAT” In Port : Boole nena 
olor! of 
: Port Sald /Alexandria 

Genoa /Marsellles / 
Antwerp ‘Rotterdam / 
Amsterdam /Mamburg /, 

. Copenhagen /Gothenburg, — 

ate : end of Feb. ad 


De LA RAMA LINES 


®XPRESS CAKGO LINER SERVICES 
Tu AND FROM PAGIFIC & ATLANTIC COASTS 
U.S.4. LOADING DATES 


+ 
Loads Date Vessel 
Attentla Coast ) Mid. Jan, m.v. “TONGHAI" 
F) : ; Los Angeles , Late Jan. m.v. “DONA ANICETA” 
: ARRIVALS 
¥ ‘ From Date. Vesvel 
Racitlc Coast tat Jan. ‘mv, “MANGALORE” 
-Allantlo Coast ) — t2th San. my, “ANDAMAN” 
+ toe Angeles } = %2nd Jan, a, “PONA AURORA” 
‘ : ae SAILINGS 
; ee es os Date , Ves. 
& Los Angeles } 16th Satie, ny, unNDatiait” 


woot emp eas, 


Atlantic Coast > 
via 20th Jan. 8.8, "DONA AURORA" - 
koa Angeles} ‘ 


| _BOOKING AGENTS. foi P.A.L. | 
“THE DE LA RAMA STEAMSHIP CO., INC. 


MARINA HOUSE CHINESE SHIPPING OFFICE 
Teld. 28676—22675 " Tels, 28788-20188 


INA MER 


Sees ae Peete 


ae THE ‘Critta MAiL, WEDNE ataday 9 


nm A one oe eee 


HAVANA CONFERENCE 
Internati Ohal Trade Conférence Problems: 


Condon Americé Assists. |e. IH.K. Stock Stock 


Stok a ae In p; ‘ogress +6 Exe lange 


- Havana, S 28, tradine wae on a tare 


ex 
fo ‘thin yeaterday, Barto’ Oe 


eee ; : aw Ce SN ae . 
REFRIGERATION—SPECEAL CARGO OIL TANKS— . 
CARGOCAIRE—SPRCIE 


TO SAN FRANCISCO- | 


E ithe United Natfons conference ® on gagae s roto lll fm sol pee eon | be 
yimient restim: ull, & w yy WINK, Coie, Loans; dep Lean’ igeey| 83. “Gonéral . Molxa” (via Shanghal & Yokohamn) ...... Dec, 38° 
xchange Bie Garistnids Tull, Still facéd by several major ie pat me et a : ss “Biacae anaile (via Shanchal & Yokohama)". Jan. 12 
; , ; Py i Digi ete 8 
Th , Lotidon, Dees mm. Broblere One bly advanco | cntiié when Dee enone :£1ib\an! Chartered] BP Peenene CIES Sts Senna) ems Jan, 20. o 
ime le, 
siden Ge Ate ed ite. fete found Fo aticas io: spr annotineed a1; Dank of Fast Asta. 1808) ne 88 “General, Gordon”: (via Manila & Honolula) ves. Jang. ZL 
purines rather small but nevertheless to is raat ocng a the \ propeee fn- oinmaraneees Canton aceeenieatiees TO SAN FRANCISCO AND LOS ANGELES . 
a firm tone was evident and remain- ‘sation. 0 derariters 61h, Otens JL Fire ins, “i on 
d tnabittoue te acgions N.Y. Ss ck ertintionyt, tad’ organ 88 “President Taft” (vin Shanchal) ... vn Jan, 8 
. British funds were mostly. neglected i sng ae gore ° aking Dovptnnon’ $00n: 1k. g¢ t.| 98 “President Plerce” (8. ¥F. Direct) .. . Jon 14 
but mast groups in induetrlals ruts Exchané e nuppotted a suited vote’ | Stesmboate 14 t6n; Indo’ Chin {88 “Clovis Victory” (via Man!innnd Cebu) .... ». Jan. 49! 
tered gains, particularly in building : pystem favouring big industrial WOn; (Def) 100n; Bhells (Vener) 13/-03 88 “Presldetit McKinley” (via Shanghai & Yokohama) - Jan.. ad 


Us Waterboata (Old) 40d: (New) 46a. 
Powers, Doche, Wharves, Godowns, Ete, 1K & 


ohe af two mindt adjustrents among | buck on the récovery, eraék fatled {4] Since it éperied bn Novembér Fears (C, Res.) (KX. Rte, 
Kaffirs., pest cases today although assotie!|o1 the confeterite’s six ¢om- ‘ : 
Among foreign bonds, Japanese | favourites put up a fair show af re |mittees and sundry, sub-com- 


shares, textiles and breweries, New York, Dé, 40, 
Mines were generally quiet with fies to get the siStk tithes 


TO NEW YORK AND. HAVANA VIA MANILA; 
"| SINGAPORE, COLOMBO, COCHIN, BOMBAY. 
Rab. |, SUEZ AND ME ITERRANEAN PORTS 


nt 
lotine éased off nome profittaking- with | slatarce,  _ ye py gmittecs have held” about 150} . Mining: Raub Mince Sune ‘Wk. Mines 
4% 1910 one point fower at 27, Mild support arrived i meetings, devdted chiefly to con: O26b, ae ‘Marine Snapper” (culls Karachl) 3 
Quotations hour and extreme tos aning Wfatderdtion of nearly 600 amend-| Lands, Motels & Didan: H. & 6. Hotels 5B “Mark su, lonro! a 
BANKS: a point or more were trimmed ‘tn | mertta suggested by varloug dele- Beh 24/24 an; MEK, Landa, (Old) $90, Pi iatom he ce b 
Chartered Dank, wennieeeneg Sa hnoxt carcs at ihe el atte . [gations-ts the proposed ITO char- | f/Mlsa: | (New) , tomate ales 2 83 “Prealdent Polk’ 2 
Ky anchal Nanking Corp, cre were transfers. o i, x jter drafted by the reparator: 
Mercantile Hank .....0.. ue ah ones, Quotationas. Adama, Exp Geneva Conteeenee: R 7) LK. Hy Bai Chloe Eetaten, th AMERICAN PRESIDENT LINES. LTD. 
MINING BHARES: 1144, Aluka Juneau &%, American Cop one - Heb BTS leeway Hy ' 
Covell dated Galdtekts f : neh 1M, American ‘Smltin bss. An The ‘big ‘controversial iasues aaa tahoe arenes (0 a) OR ne [New . at Georgé’a Bids. ; Tel. Nos. 28174 /281%5 . 
' . & erlean d ‘obaced 67, . : , 
Coneolicsted. Fin. Ming: < v en Fabel aa pret Corn stilt unsolved Include: s 2 nen @, Lets ony 20 %bb 20467 Mem ae 
New Unton Goldfields ....... 1. 454, Mnldwin Locomotive 14, Barnedall! Firgtly, whether economically} jon sib, 1 /atteaa: (Newt 


eal a Para eel an At fates Tiel JAvlaten: 2976 3 Pthtcherm undeveloped countries should ré-| you, dnuAoians Macao Electelen try 
Fie diates: Develonmenta. Bt  edsn eee te. Canbdiah Pacite 1 ‘Ttain d free hind to protcet thele | vandaken Lighte 19: Telephones (Old) 
Roederand ‘ [Sh Cane’ ob84 Menu besr i te noe {Infant Industries by Import quotas dongns iNew) a0%6R, 

Cons Maéffi Bt i 46%, Commercial Sulvent 21%, Corn Pro. | aNd similar quantitative restric. 
Balnt Hetenas A i 04%, Dupont 188%, Kastman} tions without prior ITO appro- 
De La Rue, ord, Kodak 43%, Electric Llght/Power 154,) Val. 

Sab, Mrewerlra ... Rlectric S¢X, General Motors 
Weat Driefuntlena .. a, Goodrich Gh, Coodycar 48%, Grey: 
Lydenburg Fatatey o 0.0... 2: Homestake Mining av%,( that sych freedom would be tan. |" 


Indoetriatar Cald. Mac, (Ord.) 20105 
(Pref.) Gn: Cantun leea Tn: Cement 
(Olly 3O%in: (New) 893hn; HK, Rope) 
201/, 

America's Clalr Wileox warned |. Blores de.v Dalry’ Ferme 514b; X.Nte 
6644/6000; Watsons Ghb, 06/65 


» Fe: Cat Litza hee 


“VANS racinn SATLINGS 


Lane, Crawford 
Satine Harveator 81, Internatlonal{tamount fo “ebcnomle anarchy” | Gane uamriren gant, Hinccres | A.tgn To San Francisco & Los: Angeles 
Jeet Manele oie aehneee |e hat hopes of aon DEOCE | Kwong Sane Hone 2b, 20000; Wine _ SPRCIA; CAR 20 IN TANKS. 
cee vetnseeenesnes 10/8 r 41%, Montuomery’ Wank 59%,1 Sebond wiethien preferential | & Von: Wm. Powell, ltd Due Saits 
SN eas WY" Now Work Contin! 184 Phckied Moxon | {Rade DENeCpente are going ta be “ Ghiné  Endertalnmenite m " Jun. 2 Jon, 8 
Burma Corp. . . 8 4%, Pan American Airwaya 8%, Peo ting ted td those prea y In force ‘ tructigns (Old) Clin: | 8A “FLEET WOOD un, Jan, _. ‘ 
Chane nine : Mian Or ata, ade Coty stuf ard révognised under, the Geneva | (ew) tn: ‘Vioro Filtng 64nt Maranan| #8, “SURPRISE”. © 9 --~. Sn. 12 Jan, 18 — 
‘ Real vik 12%, Republic Steel 28%, charter or whether undertlevelop- | tnvedtmente 13/8 Maraman, ati) / ad, “PACIFIC BEAR” Jon. 14 Jan, ¥5 Direct 


VW6n. 
Cottons: Ewos 1360, 140, 13% em 


48. “FLYING DRAGON” Jan, 22 Jan, 230 = 
as. “PHILIPPINE BEAR” Feb. 4 Feb, 6 Via Kobo: 


Reynolde Tobacco 40%, Schenley. 31%, [Cd coilnirizs may conclude new 
Spring Mines , . Bears Rocbuck 87%, Shell olf #4, preferentin! agreements. 
flubNigels ... by Bocony Vacuum 17, Bouthern Pacific 48th, Thirdly, the scope and powers 
Tayoy Tin Co. .... Standard Urands 264%. Standard Olt “otfc? the [To's OniY coment fission, N ¥ SILVER’ 
Union Corporation .., eer a) Callf, 62, Standard Ol of N. J. 78%, Fourthly, the composition of one wm. " 
SUHIPPINGS: : Btudebeker 21, Union Bag 28%, Union| fipotq overning board.—United G&G GOLD 
P, & 0. BN, Co, ord. . . Carbide 100%, UA Rubber 46%, | UST pice, 8 7 
GILTRDGES: Btec! 17%, UB Lines 20%, Westinghouse | PFees. ‘ Silver, Bar (isked price) 74-% ¢é3, 
Conversion Loan, 36%, 1948/52,, 1016/18 | 30%, Youngstown Sheet/Tube 74, Gen: Bar, Gold, per fine ounce (offichal) 
Funding Loan, 34% ve 104 Publlo Uulitles 12%.—Assoclated Preas. a 7 $35; “tn, y! noel $40 sales.— 


etpanyet ewe) or... tweet ALEXANDRIA = [" 
BULLION ARGENTINE GOLb 


1962/54 Hoy 

1964/50 100% 
. Gold \per pilitegeny’ 171 plastres,| ‘Sovereign, buyers 65.50," sellers 
Egyptian Pound sho planttes, | 66.30; U.S, Eagles; 123.00b, 125.003: 


National War Honda, 101% N.Y. Emerges 
Sovereign 565 plaures, ‘Turkey Pound Gold, Bar, Gramme, 6.10b, 6.251— 


muerte ‘cn New York, Boston, 
Other Atlantic Forts ida Panamo 


6.8. “SPITFIRE” ...receeeees sereee Due Jan. 8- 
. 88 “GOLDEN WEST”. ....-.00+ ee baie ape "18 
Sailings to Manila 
6.8, “GOLDEN WEST” Jorecceccccerceres we. Sails Jan. 19 

. Sailings to New York, soston, : 
Other Atlantic Ports via’Panama ‘Canal 
— SPECIAL CARGO OIL TANKS -_. 
#3.5. WLOQKOUT” .cccssceeecsseeeterereesecee SHllg Dee, 81 
88. “SPITFIRE” ... eo svtrveseee ’ Satis Jan, 0% 
as “PIONEER SEA” .ececreceneensceecennee (ier ™ 1B 
7 Arriving New York on or about Jan, 30, 1948, 


For Fal) Particulars Call Ms lp 


UNITED STATES LINES C0. 


General. Agents 
«aad Gliese Bulldiog,. |... Tel, 81261 (8, Mee), ‘ 


BRavingsa onde, et, 1086/66 .. 101Th rae (7 
From Snow 


Bavings Honda, 344, 1960/70 .. 101% 
Bavingd Bands, $16, 1968/76 .. 101% 
Fachequer Bonds, 1060 .,..,., 100% 
NEW_ YORRK;, DEC, mide : | 370; Rawle 365 dati —Reuter. “| Reuter, 
MILLIONS STRUGGLED, BA’ 
Drltinh Console, 1945/76 2.65 RI TO, THEIR JOHS IN‘ NE pact - 


Redemption Btock, 367, 1064/00 00% 

HECURITIES; 

Converslon Loun, J4¢5, 1961 10654 " ; 

Funding Loan, Av6H/00 .,..., 124% TODAS, a Aa 4 

War Loan, 34%, 1062 ao 102% ty AN'S DOU PLAS 

War Loin, at. +. 1028 THE AREA FROM. 

Victory Hones, nay [MAINE TO | WASHINGTON, a 

RAILWAY SITARES! CAUSING AT LEAST 70° DEAT its, 

J Groot Weatern ,.. oe Most rallways Were: back tb nér- |: 
8. mal ‘operation (his morning, bie ¢he 


Long Island, which runa from Long 
foland to New York Chty, reposted 


0, LTD. 
area ae YANG? 


. ‘ nT 
ANDUBTRIALB Sailing for, Swatow and.,Foachow 
Avscclatrd Portland Gement Co, that ite trains were subject to de- 1.00 -P. M. 31st December 

Jo et eveentane . lays of more than‘an hour,. : oA 
Tinitinh Celnnen oe ‘Most principal streets cin. New ‘’. ‘FROM DOUGLAS: WHARF». 
Carreran Ltw, “A, orde oo. York Lave been cleared of the: 25 Subject to aiteration without. NOE ut 


J, & BP, Coats, ond, ae inet, by th : 
Se HY (RST ace aae| hr Reet ot ist & Pn, a ey 


Diatiltets Co., ord. Friday, using more, than ape DOUGLAS LAPRAIK. & Co. 


Dunlop Rubber Co, ee ve 
Ld Afabbitls hid rye of mechanical equipmeltt Rew) t 
_ Getieral . Managers, ... aye EP Se 


Bouthern italiwey Ca., ‘def. \ 
London, Passenger Tr. 65% 1 SAN ISOK 


Imperial Chemical Induatrles. 


Imprriat. Toboeen Co. ........ 


Lever Uros, & Unlleve jf P. #0. Building ; 6S sf 5 
LONDON SILVER Protest ‘Against: ee ee 
& GOLD Ship Sales _ CHINESE SHIPPING, DEPT... - OvrWaRDs ‘fo sHANGHAT 
orwell, eter fine ounce 45d; ah or iow York, Dec, 26 am % Connaught ace Contra}. _ Fel, No shana es MY. “NAGAR? . Discharging LE, ° end Jan.‘ 
orwdr: ay e ahipping section ic he arto VN te ee tae 
fact ote ne Oa a ERE = ,HOMEWARDS TO EUROPE 


eccrine | THE HO HONG STEAMSHIP |" esr Ppa a oe 
‘NOTICE TO grove threat to ‘the: future ‘of | iz cg 
American shipping"; the Nationul co. (: 1932). LTD. : ADEN, PORT SAID.MARSCILLES, ANTWERP, . 


: CONSIGNEES Federation of Ameried Shipping ROTTERDAM, (AMSTERDAM) COPENHAGEN, : ry 
satd today in a report to its mem: iia, O8LO AND GOTHENBURG... : 


bers. ae rerien aan A : 
‘These comprise, it was clalmed, Tanks’ available sultsble for catriage of bulb: oll 


pmianaag 
. “HONG giANG” 


Consiannts PER 


BARBER . ..... i Bae ea ee the dry-cargo ‘ - Hor further, particunire apply to:— 
i 5 : 
ee ees Ca Péderailon blared that ft ead an GILMAN & CO., LTD. 
yo: te 1 reugonable |. i 
M/V LIDVARD' : supports aft icopeh Rerer, : ia Agents. Felaphone BUA as yon cee 
dre hereby notiffed that theft Dut Vigorcusly opposed Bor SINGAP: ORE: &. PENANG . 


cargo is being discharged Intd 
e Hongkong & Kowlobn Wharf fe 
.Godown Co'a godown’ whete it “gains by'.23 


i Subject ‘To Alteration ‘Without, Notlee.. - ;, 
For Farther Particulars - On, Freight ‘& Passage 


KLAVENESS LINE 


will at gtgesie! i aE ibs ‘20,00 £0 Be tee * Please ‘Apply: 
rere a THE HO,HONG Co. (CHINA) LTD. 
oat _ 484; Bonham Strand, \ ‘Tels.:20127 & 25640 a ; i . 
: Damaged: packiges ire-+b- bo aa wit eA [Le Be Wehbe TAG ay i ’ -BATLING: GS | eae 
lott in the Glows for evi. an a!  piscet to LOS ANGELES, SAN Fiatishio 
SAILING DIRECT | FOR BANGKOK PORTLAND, VANCOUVER & SEATTLE: 
5 m8. “ROSEVILLE” 5 


ARRIVALS — PAGIRIC COAST 


SS. “EMPIRE PARR’. 
rte \STLEVILE sigheon si, DUE Ist JAN. 


ames 


LOADING {st JANUARY, 1948 


{94 


~ SAILING a JANUARY, - 1948, 


rT 


was aust 
Chinesé-- Fo wl ie 


Tht 


ie 


seeGd ve 


{MARITIMES | ue “mast ore |SAPPING NTELLIGENCE| TARDINE, MATHESON &C0.,LT0 9 


Chtia_¢Wallem) 938 tone from Singapore (Indo-China, Siam, Malaya, 


L? | expt 0 Rabarovs,’, YET, ; 
ARRIVALS FROM Outward Mails Jie Mate’ (CSE) i [atta sane: EEE staan FREIGHT, DEPARTMENT me besarte 
: : at Yang (Dourlas Cora Whe, : . i 
Poole vin Bangkok: ' NRW YEAR TIOLIDAY Hindiatan- (aeiinets) “8014 tone from |Tsluatenaka, (L0Pe) “from. Macswar _ TEL, S031 _-_» FEL, 30318 
Dec. 31, BOAC (Capt. Rudd),) 9. ci urday, Jen. 1, 1948 the Generst ‘Balgon (Capt: G.: Dtack), ..K. Wht. nd JyVe DOCL, 600 ase sina e ne Mee " , ‘ 
, war 210 p,m." Pout Office aad Kowloon. Central Pout Hel Bhan. (Bacon? ake ees Kechpor. (te #8.) from. Blogapore. . General Managers. 
: Only via, Bangkok: Ine pane seent Dime Same cake to [ieee a cieraah nes itt J Being (Ri 8) too Rae he _ INDO-CHINA 5. N. CC <6,, TD... 
: Arriving from EUROPE via Ports Dee, 31, Branthem, 2 Pim. [iy Se There will be one delivery of {Yen Tal (CMBN} Gree Wht | [OCs Mast (APA) fo Manila Jan 38) SANG nA en 
«J a“ Manila: Ordinary and Reslstered Correspondence | Rrottiah Prince (Jandine’ a)... Ke ie 2 . a8. “LOKSANG” oe a of 7 oe x 
A; “CIIRISTIAN SASS” . . Beginning Jasuaicy Bb at 10 a.m, and one collection only frum u Fi pr seety mia teness mapore, Penang, god) 
4 Bs. Jan, 2, Cathay Pacific, Noon. | iiuar boxes. SOUTH A RICAR FORTS & Calcutta noon Silat Wipe, 
“i as, MANDIRE LEBON" cecrcsssee eee ese coerce Mildide: sESHIAGEY Singapore via Bangkok: ‘The Money Order Office ‘will be entirely La DEEARTURES YESTERDAY amoral Aes oe rian alee i‘ by Keune 
pees eeee ee EEE S| Singapore via Bangkok: [ce att Maerak (debeen) to asses Pe eee eee ney 9 ee hy : 7 
fe Se Cathay Pacific, 3 p.m.| “Unies otherwise stated, Registered | **MMa A AB) to =... Kure | tenchere (3.0.P.L.) from Bouth ‘Afytean 8.8. ““WINBANG” ......, to Shang oe ‘eee i 
iq nah in BOAC (Capt. _Need- Arileles and Vareel Posts clove 30 minutes | Niderve (Hank, Line) Fel 8.8. “EMPIRE WITHAM to Shanghai, Rabe 
. am) pm, caller than the OrdMary Mail. aid | ny, as). : & Yok ‘ 
Sailing to EUROPE via Ports ahenstiat: elowe hetore a, om. Dealers | and chain iE A A SAILING scikoULes 85. “ESANG” | Bath to bineapore, enang { oth Jan. 
: & 3 sw m., view | Leomedon (1, @ 5, 0 
ace RRR LEONE Lo coienee ee dane OEM eos End February | Dally, CNAC (DC4), 10.45 a.m. | stay. Hin Bane (Jardine’s} 1) warty) AMERICAN PORTS — BS. “MAUSANG” ., ree Powuuen ike Yan. 
a8 : Dec. 31, HK Alrways 3.30 p.m. ey eONeahy DEL at Aven hae Fyny 22! . Ag (PACIFIC & ATLANTIC) 8.8. “WINGSANG" . 1at Jan. 
Be eseeaee In Honolula, DAY, DEC: DEPARTURES TODAY |: | pec. a & Shanghat Fan. 
‘ San eee a Ohinawe: heat lcion Say Ate Lauran Maersk ebweny to icy Kedluna [AD Capital tah cea Toe 8.8. “HINBANG” oes to” Sandakan in ia 
sor Tae d Fret Sh: i i if _Angdles a n Frenelaco, vial ‘> Shoe : A is . 
RONEN ce Z lala sects Jon, agra American, 4.45 p.m, jirmal for Swatew, Talnan and Amor. | Atipur VESSELS 1 oe nen: Marlies viataa ip es | 88 “HINSANG” | mIYALS : 
.) 9 am. (Ord) 9.30 a.m, r , aa . 
CIE DES MESSAGERIES MARITIMES San jFranctico (via, Honotute, MRlcmait for. ‘Mele a, Honolule, | Aiphone (GRID | cane Allele. Parte = (00 taint) to} ig legis ‘we Gr a Keeling: fa 
: ‘ake, Guam, Manila): U.BA, and Canada, (Rox) 030 0.2. ] Amaranthus (Wheelock) vo y A a" « MIRE WITHAM” . ; ist 
” Queen's Building. : Tel, 26651 (three Lines). Dec. 31, Pan-American, 12.45 Ord) Gems, ile RULE Rey the Annlock (Wallemy ; 88. Jan ene Rents \ 88. per cine Strats ” 
7 oe ome z pms | Anchlice ire 15 Paclfic: ‘Transport: (aardine' 4) (to Loa f Sand: 
— DEPARTURES To {Ord.) 8.20 p.m, Menual (Gilman) ealee «from Sandakan 
Alrmail for Canton, Liuchow and Kun-| pris ethene aa ae an and Ban. Pranclico, via veofram Shanghat ite Ghee i 
a ? : ih Sus taie barns, * i 
: Pate ty AREER cng, Wiis] Rate SBEOMAE Seabee Maeaee| Rare es = 16 vhligsie Sener eri) of 88, RURIANG™ ennnuctromCeenia Th Tan. 
are : boo ee ‘iiams) 8 a.m, Tainutao and Pelping. (Ret) 3 p.m. , Bar (Caroll BB. navies end. en beret via ‘ & Straits , ait 
Oxlo via Bangkok: 3 10rd) 3.30 pam. Canandoc (Chinn B.B. ; : M0, [16° pects Hew (APL) ta Bai Fran : Retigerated « Space + avait“ for Straits, sae 
: Jan, Braathens, a.m, : Cather! SE. Asia) . . ' Catecutta. 
: Cleetng Times Dy Bea and Train Charles, Macdennell a buy i 18 pee oan tiirhiary Ban Frans Caigo ‘goveptea, on Through “ills: & of Luding ‘fo MABE, tA] 
kok Chita (Wallem) cescccec cae : wis. Binzaporo and for KUDAT,' Baar 7 
Hl Singapore via Bang Cantnne acme tlaco, JESSELTON, LABUAN, TAWA. 
: Jan, 2, Cathay Pacific, 7 a.m. Clovertock (Whrelack) ...... 8. Mid Jen. Tong Hat (De La Rama) to LADHAD-DATU and ‘SEMPORNA vio Sandaka: 
% Banukok: anes Tanah oad Be Attica aa Eastern Venture (Rymo 8.8.) ...Yaumati| . “U.S. and Allantls Porte. eR ae 
4 Jan. 3, Pan-American, 2.15[ ang Hurope vial Li ar O45) | Empire Hilda (M.0.T,) N. Pt, Quay] Late Jan. Duna Ablceta (De La Tamk) . 
H pe verpoul,  (Tes,) Emp. Farrar (Wing Fon, to U.S, and t) os Ge . .M 
1, CONNAUGHT ROAD CENTRAL a “Ranken and Caleutta, {0 PSE Ra LAA leet 28. Phin Dron (AP to bes Fran A TRA ra Perit: 
HONNG ‘ « g. anroon an moult, nm. pie ql ie 
: Manila: Manlin, 3 p.m, 3 Emplre Tern (Williamson) .., é claeu und Loa Angtive us LIA CHINA LINE, kL D 
oe Telephones: 30331-8 Pelyate Exchange. Jan, 1, Pan-American..6 a.m, | Nonlin, 3 tr iow, Noon, FE. Bang (Jardine’s) ......0.. Kin, Dk} 24 Ichannen Maerek (Beersk tai); a9 u 7 oon — 
é cals ance Oe Decsoy fuinukce not’ aren, 1 pum, [Fe Kwang (A.D) ae aay York, and Adland Porte, = mv. “IMKDUBTAN” 0... -Discharglig” Kloot: “whit, 
: Cantin, 2 pm," Hal Tan (Douglas Co.) .... Co's Wht. ; as oads for Shanghai about 3: 
Agents: CHINA NAVIGATION CO., LTD. | “Bn; dysc, wen 1565 am) Sitid BB, cin, cnt aot |AR a e G M| e " | eet ea” 
= rN . antl au erica vin Ban Franclscy (MN | Mab Yang (Do i ” ' Py , nds for Australian Ports abi % 
SAILINGS TO San ieanelico a noe Frawele for Canada), ar, and Rew.) Wong Slane (Ho -F pa Vhityytne | Meir ane to Ban ; U5th January. nevepting: roan : 
MKWEIVANG" .. ..csssaeeAmoy, Swatow, Saigon Singapore |_ Jun. i, Pan-American, 8 a.m.| duan (Ord. letters and canta ontys. | Warun woes ks hr | New Zealand Vietery davdlas's) to) ys 1 ie a New Zealnnig ance wyiding for 
My ened & Penang ...... B xm. ist Jan. |San Francisco (vin  Shanghal.| 3 p.m. Lee Chun (Tal Chong) BB. Po March nigolen and aa ihe) hh _) MLV. “KAFIRISTAN” mies .Londs - Syd 1 ‘ 
YO SZAROIIGEN' lessee coeee Watow, Bangkok fa Okinawa, Guam, Wake, Hono- Maran, Tainshan ant Bhekki, 4 pm. | rardslock (Wallem). Vinton Fee erate Terie a)’. New saveneaans “pee nee, ey a ten nibs 
Te BAIA Aik, Vat aan: attr) : " antmoun. 4 p.m, é . rne, Ade 
ane” ae eK ES a Salgon pam "1 Gan, 2, Pan-American, 10 aan.) Canton, & pm, ; Mectan ¢ra tana) 2 : in oe pele sia. Vrerats erg akg , Rydney inne ere a 
p , Sin, . Jan. Meishan (Rocony) Ba ara) ‘Mm ary 
4, Singapore coe cA pccreeee Melsanic AUH ON Sab ve “Ba Soler, Syeting Beste Buss ahd for Hong Kong and Sangha 
+ Shanghal a hin 5pm ea Jun. _ Rew Comba ana 8.) Tatkou Dk. | End Feb. Andre Lebon (M.M.) to Europe. Ac ts: GLEN LINE LTD, 
waAmoy, Foochow, hanehas arey 2 8). in i igen 
Perilock (Wallen). . Yaumatl 
“PENGTIEN lipen Parien rpm ith Jan, THE EAST ASIATIC C0. T gamemagiat realli a ose ‘eatin wc ve Ha iy Yoonine ie ae cn. SAILINGS et 
OCHO Singapore & “Wan Diwunlidi Minter) Ccecc WAL Pree, Fatt (APA), ; “DENBIGHSIMIRE” waneatonds for London & Continen- 
Ponang .. 4 pan, 8th Jun. Hau Fenesto (2, Mnnneray 2. Ymamatt ee aes Wardine's) to ae tal Ports aH Straits & Sues 
* Sails from Costodian Wharf). OF COPENHAGEN + | Shapur (Nematea) ss seccses autnath Franclaca. . my “QueNAnTNEY" i about ith an, é& ‘ 
: Seottleh Prince OK Whe weds LV. W csalbeateaa sloonds . 
“ARRIVALS FROM : : Shantung (1, a 8) aes i” Blsrtmond «CAFE ) to Ban Franelsen tal porte vin bit & Céntinih- 
¥ . _. fm. st Jan. Staratone (Uank be . | Jan. vet _ End February, 
“¥Ot ow ; x Gia iisitioe "dng Tere MUIR LER etibe ¢prainecd Vietoty (Asta (8b peas ARRIVALS : 
SRENGTIEN' ‘eee Sava, Singapore 5th Jan. S Te L Y; rT a ‘ tseehen ware ‘: Di Franatito and Loe Angeles vie MY. *DENBIGHSHIRE” _.... --eSalled from london zai Ni 
; M M A A A ‘alshan Pea ). .8, Brltfire, (UBL) io Mantis . ey. “GLE Sone 
‘ CANTON RIVER LINE mibisisia tae Cit se 6 Sire “Htontoe ret “a Re. ant MLV. “GLENAPR” oo. Sea ea TN ih Bee 
‘ 7 “ : : es ‘ + 7 J Bidgapore. | yy Ht ‘ a 
“EAESTEAN" 5 Maree Sail, 1 am, 2nd Jan, . i 2 Tatune (A BY. vee BQ, G bladed fe A ia a Ban: Fri MLV. “RHEXENOR” —.......08. ew Sate from London T¢h 
“WUSUEH" : force too ane qe loading about 20th Janucry ; Were hea : sci vn tnd ovate ws ae ee due aboat 
SUE fee rereere TTT) nn 3 < : 2 #119 Marine Filer (AP. Pay ele, Shai, 22nd Jan, 
Se P Wo Chany a fecutunr Higvan vis Manil MLV. “GLENARTNEY”. 0.00.0... Sulled from London 238 Dée, 
REF ‘or Ai c On if.1 12) Marino Swallow (A,1] ‘ vin Suez & Straits due early Feb. 
Agents: BLUE FUNNEL LINE BE yee eS puBMne aeatialec Carll te Gienairag, Leaves London Std 
; . -_ ; & | , : Feb, for Port Said Straits one i 
U.K. SERVICE PORT SAID, ANTWERP, ROTTERDAM, . VESSELS DUE 10 chin Wary Cay to Ban Fr | Kong & Shanghal, ae 
ae . AMERICAN PORTS elneo. ‘ : . 
Arrivals from, . OSLO, GOTHENBURG AND COPENHAGEN (Paelfie & Atlantic Coast) ab Week Cleveland (AdNES). de! Ban t Ag ents: ® 
*LAQ MEDIO U.K, via Straits ~ itat Dee: Tanks availabl tor the Currin ‘ or on hi B ik. eo Andaman (Do. ia Rama) from Atianite Franelnto. - g Lae ‘ 
Ni — ye Mid. Jan. anks e rs in Bu pnee hae seve tables 14 Hrea, Vike (A.P.E,) to 8, Franelaco, WESTERN CANADA STEAMSHIP Co. re 
— Bnd Jan. THE EAST ASIATIC CO., LTD ate gS tao) SS LAKE WINNIPEG BD 0 
Sony Se en an. | : 1 - antic Tort ... , Yokohama, from Vancouv : 
ep bw be, Prev, Polke (AP) from Ne Feb, : sal uc er. 
Sallings to : . fs : don, 29, “LTC Linflel! Victory (Uardlie's) to Bae via Shanghai... and - 
“ANCHISES" Alexandria, Tangier, Queen's Bldg., 2nd floor. es Tel. tut & 84112. Cortlaville TANKDINE) rom jPaelde . teen, s i ? Formosa, about tth. Jan. 
MYRMIDON i AN al FP ine. : Saat Dee —_— Dea Aurora (De ta iiame) Hal Allane Angeles anil Ban Francleco. Loads for Varcouver 
OUYR N" —— : ne Cunat, via Angoley, Late Jan. | Mar. - ‘ 
1 verpaol & Glasgow we pn ee ae RD (AVL) from Ban Franc 16 Pacihe 4 Transport , (Jerdine'’s) “to a aM” Seen On a aan 
via Straits & Port Said - oth Jan. a ve dan, 22, ‘Anueics and Ban Francisco’, 8.8. “LAKE CAN seer sevenneone Loads for Vancouver’ rant lth 
aes ri ) Atlantte 25 Philippine ee “(Iurdineys)” to pe January if sufficient apee- 
7 ‘ vee Jan, 2. Low Anitelea and ? : ° 
NEW -YORK SERVICE aig ats pt Anteles and Ban Franco...) 2s “LAKE LILLOOET” ....... Lond for Pace Ca ag: Ente 
E Ht t oe oe 7 se Ol . ancouver 
f Arrivals from : _ ROUND INE WORLD SERVICE Gotten wit (A{P.L.) ‘from’ New York... Feb. souTHt ‘AFRICAN Ponts: . sufficlent inducement od : 
“PREAM" U.S.A. ‘via Manila End Jan. a f alan ay 1 Texsbers wer) fo Bott Afeoam, ae 
_ . and Shanghai ; “Sco | T ISH PRINCE” earn Detean) from New York, ater, hake Eubdject to alteration without’ notice. St 
Es ee Gertrude ‘Mi Mer {Jebsen) from Now| 2" " ; ’ fi : 
Agents: Australian Griental Line, Ltd. e Tee Mirtne ‘Snapper. { Ab ben Free: Se * Mia port au intending ‘Passengers are requested to regliter thelr names as 
‘Arrivals from 5 8G ; NOW LOADING Pirelsoe ate n) Me Ben Er CANADIAN PoRTS | _ tar as possible in advance of thé time at which they wish to leatie 
Yo MYUNNAN" Australia via Manila 16th Jan. , . KOR Mangalore (De' “La “itama) from Pacific | 24” ‘ : a 
) ‘Sailings To GA R wenn dice eee sen] 7 Lake Winniven (Juflloe's) to Van- Agents: 
. ‘archen ners! febeen: rom New hd S bd 
Pr rrcre tit) oat ari | 30 Lake Canim (dard ‘to. Vancouver. | ° . 
YUNNAN Sydney & Melbourne via Manila 24th Jan . SIN PO E Prick: : aia ee ue sin Be Paieodene Lake dari’) to Vane i ss 4 PRINCE LINE LTD. ; 


* Accepts cargo to N. Z. and Fiji Islands ports on through B/L 


PACIFIC TRANSPORT LINES INC. : 


Als t End Jan. . Vancouver, 
jo accepts Cargo for MADRAS on through Bills of Lading n (x 


Ali The Above Subject To Alteration Without Notice. Se Sea Serpeant (U.B.L.): trom Ban Francloce, AUSTRALIAN fe SOUTHERN General Agents: - 
mess JARDINE, MATHESON & €0., LTD. senior ia em) feos UB, ... ea den, | _ GuNLEPRRTS OE ty  outifehs BRITISH peer ‘a pores 
seneri ; ) j ‘) Lte © gan, 8. ; t : SEE SEPARATE ADVERTISEMENTS. — 
General Agents for SEYWAYS (FAR EAST) Ltd. Te}. SORIL Bolte ALP astro Ws da 8s) Oe vitory (geal yi 


. (See Separate Advertisement). ; Chinese Freight Agents: :—CHEONG FAT To acti Ss Ameriéa sos esses Jan, 24] Jan. : 
GENERAL Agents for AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL AIRWAYS Ba, Bonham Strand. Telephone 2u08? * | Surprise (ADL) Com Ban rans i Gervate aed Arbors ¥ Masta ani) 
~ (see ae meme and Loa Angeles’ apn? an Patligelnd Transport, (iene 
. eb. ii q 


Booking Agents-For: B. O.A: C. C.N.A.C. & PALA. = Tretn Macrak (Jebden). trom NY. 
meow ~ | Pacite Bear (AcP.L;) from Ban Francisco} 15.. Nellore (E- & A.) LXPHESS TRANS-PACIFIC SERVICE 
Wor Passage and Freight ‘Particulars Apply To The Above. Philippine Deer .{APiL.) from San Fran- Hindwtan (Sardines) to! Abate " voy , , ae 
+ else ees sae teaeoee Fab, 2.) 24 Yunnan (th & Byduey and | \ Le ‘Ss. Ss 
AA TRALIA’ ; oye seta eg 
: Mau Seng (dardine's} from fandakan, | 8 ‘Tren Maerek (Jebsony }to ‘Manila. ‘ 7; 
= ‘ Yunnan (B. & 8.) .from ‘Ristraljn vin] 13 Lelee Maersk Arete PU: Maal.” CAPITA : VICTORY’ 
rence eee <a ema : . ARRIVALS fee ARS TRS AER Van, ‘Ta iniard: c ae hts a 
i nea ey foe Australia pide y Due from ety Conrt Ist Jan. ~ ming 
7 — Nankin (E, & A.) from: Auistrafia, 2 - 
—M AERSK. LINE 88. -cmeeake on UK. 7th Jan, Barly Mar. “ RAN 
88. “BENVRACKIE® ..... ing 10th Jan. pe ee 1ST JANUARY 
‘ SAL ‘e Andre Lelion (MM). from Euktbe «+. FOR. 
p. MOLLER, COFENTIAGEN. on READY . Los’ AN GEI 
éainship Company inc. New York fein, Antwerp GELES 
~ General Agents. 
or: Ryrther Parttonlare, Avply al "\ |onritlan ‘ane (LM) fof Bato. 


; : ‘rand Loe Atirelés crs ssce den, 14.| Barly Mar, Nhakin nag eatin 3, Aatralia | 
B aN LINE STEAMERS LTD. oe 
FROM UE. ; RUE . End Jans. 
BRITISH &, ED cop LOADS 
8.8. “BENVRACKIE” 12th Jan. 
MONTHLY SAMtaNG TO NEW ork, |’ W, &, LORLEY & CO. (CHINA) LTD. [ett aati) 5 hy ety oe ye SAN FRANCISCO - 


‘ Mid. Feb, . 
Benyrackle (Ben Line) from Unitaa ferns. 
+, End, : 


via Buem 2... ‘ ean 
ATLANTIC PORTS, SAN FRANCISCO, : Ast ene Eee ar it 


LOS ANGELES: ard PANAMA York Dandie Mette, 
ate? aeatlooks re Limited Passthaer Acconimodatk 


Ms SARE ARR sence Jam 24 —=— —— i Wasi i what apes caRao sce i os 
S, “MARC RSK” .......05. fate a 5 a ewriry shire | cy. Alte Pacten ee: 
HEN | MAER: K im 24 | mee ec) toe x] fave : NORTH.AMERICA 


Pete ceteeneeeMD BARBER WILHELMSEN LINE i 


fe, -SPEOIAL ‘OL ot TANKS 
ARRIVALS FROM | NEW-YORK ‘AND oe 


"y , 


PS. PORTS . Se iM, YE 8T £ Bie a mot a C Shas 5 Bee ehh paler + Oth-Jan, 
accreTiNg. cargo ¥dn wahica “ pana : 13tt Jan, 
Ne “GERTRUDE ‘AB BRSK™ ......., Jan. 11 a «3 an, 
I ae Jam. 15 a 
2. Feb. 8 at: ee eat tee at it é 
Feb. 12 San francisco; toad ; cs, : =, His Pa en oe Shacabt! tn. 5 


New. Yorls, Philade 


Schedules . 


A 15-minute service will 
bo maintained by the Star 
Ferry from midnight ta- 
night to 2.30 a.m. (Hone 
Kong) and 2.15 a.m. (Kow- 
loon) tomorrow. : 

The last bus on routes 1, 
2, 5,6, 7 and 8 will leave the 
Star Ferry wharf, Kowloon, 
at -2.15 a.m. tomorrow, It 
‘was announced by Mr. S. EL 
Louey of the Kowloon Mo- 
tor Bus Co. yesterday. 


PPOPDOOOPPPIDPLIODRIIAHIS 


Dangerous 
. 8 © 
‘Driver 
i] a 
Paid High 
Convicted on a charge 
of ‘driving in a manner 
dangerous to the public, 
Leung Sang, 26, was fin- 
ed $200 by Mr. W. A. 


Blair-Kerr at Kowloon 


yesterday. 

The defendant, said Traffic 
Sub-Insp. Donald Brown, was 
the driver of lorry, 6310, park- 
cd at Pak Tal Street at 4 p.m, 
on Dec, 29 for the purpose of 
unloading rubble and bricks. 

Four coolies were engaged on 
the job which wos done with 
the sideboards ang = tailboard 
down. : 

Before the boards were put 
Back Into position, said TSI 
Brown, defendant began ta 
drive his lorry off. 

Three of the coolies atlempt- 
ed to pullethe boards up, two 
coolies engaged on the aide and 

, one at the rear. 
When the vehicle bumped 
» over the road at the junction of 
Sung Wong Tol Roaq the three 
coolivs were thrown off the 
_ lorry. Two sustained. severe 
af injuries and were still in hos- 

“* nital yesterday. 


- Something 


@ Full-Length 


; 
THE PERFECT 
SWISS WATCH : : 


[BRITAIN WILL DECIDE ON), Brain's Latest Import 
Star Ferry GREEK RESULTS | [ Si - dig 


| The New: eak 


. - . + UNBELIEVABLE, YET TRUE! | 
HERE IS AN AMAZING OFFER: 


:* GENUINE 
‘NYLON STOCKINGS 


Nad @ Durable Texture 
i : ®@ Attractive Shade 


AS Great variety ‘of beautiful 


eee it - daily at ‘the. Hous ie 
AQUEAYS FIRST. WITH "CHE BEST.” 


% 


‘HONG 


KONG, WEDNES 


4 


Foreign Office 
Warning To Slavs 


ae ‘London, Dec..29. 

A Foreign Office spokesman sald today that re- 
cognition of the rebel provisional Greek 
“government” by any nation “would be in- 
terpreted by His Majesty’s Government as a 
grave deterioration in the international situa- . 


tion.” : 

The statement was interpreted here as a warning |. 
to Albania and Bulgaria which are reported - 
to be considering early recognition of Gen. 


‘er Markos. id that British fd 
he spokesman said that Brits tstroyed two of st 
monitoring showed that the [have been shelling eo ce 
Yug:slav radio in Belgrade had Kenitsa troops are silt! clearing 
brondcuut. extensive propaganda |the helghts, The town itself 
favournble to Markos but said he [suffered a major fire sarted by a 
could nat confirm Athens charger ee shell, 
that Markos’ “Free Greece" Radio| . ary reports fro 
wos put on the air vin Belgrade }sald thot 2.000 Sine 
{nelities, ‘ fighling In the orens of Ginmba 
Athens repzrts referred tof!a and Kaolpaki and were at: 
hand.to-hond fighting on the {tempting to move in reinforce. 
fighting fronts, where the Govern: |ments over the Albanian border. 
ment antiguerrilia offensive con-| Guerrillas In the Mourgant aren 
tnucd to gain ground against the |are retreating towards the fron- 
hard-battling Communists, under |tlor after a. strong Army ccunter- 
the personal leadership of General /altack, in order to escape encir- 
Markes. clement, 


Bayonet Attacks Council. Of War 


Guerrijns captured. in’ the| The Minister of ‘War (M : sa ven hy 

wind.wwipt hills sald that Markos |Stratos) visited the Janninao mili- Londen airport’ ater fiyine’ 708 oie hom niet tetas in 

had placed himself at the head of |tary hospital yesterday to see Baffin’ Land. fe niles 

eee. battallona ang ante thee polaiers wounded on the Konitsa Rebeecn has come home with Mrs. Turner, whose lis 

they had been tol at artillery |{rcnt, and conferred for three] band Canon Turner accidentally shot himself on a seal-huat- 

and alr force reinforcements for | hours with the commander of the} ing expedition, tb act us roid to Mrs,. Turner's two: child- 

their cause were expected from|Second Army Corps and other] ren, June and baby Barbara. = * : : 
outside Grecee” on the vital military tenders, *BHOTO SHOWS:—Rebecca carrying fifteen month old Bar- 

Konltsa_ front. The guerrillas are reported to! bara Eskimo-fashlon when she arrived with Mrs. Turner at 
Guerrilla Insses were described {have shelled Nesoricn, north of] London Alrpert.—APhoto 

as heavy in fighting on Saturday | Kenitsa. in pert. * 


and Sunday which Included! A high Governmen : 

bayonet attacks on Communist] talked by faleanone today” whe fh ; . oe 
posts between Konitsa and Janni-| M, Strator jn the Konitsa fighting : 

na, Shooting was: going on In| area, sald the Army appeared to ‘. ‘ eae 


the area of the.Rambala Heights} be in control of the gsituaticn and 


and near Yercplntanos and Mav-|many  newly-arrived — relnfores- 4 ; 
rovounlon,. ments had not yet . te ' , fy nel es ‘ 
Government troops have occu-/ action, - sd gone. -into * a : ca, , “ ‘ 
picd the heights south of Gram-| The source satd he believed ® : Eye Rs Ae; 
said ‘ rs « a ‘ : 
‘ , * at ee F 


lala, but press dispatches unconfirmed reports cf Hy 
guerrillas still, controled in. ‘increased uerritla eee re 


t ‘ “ Aen 
heights of Elafotopos. Vasilikon | exaggerattd and th B 4 i rX'! ! ee 
and Kulivia’ overtooking the road | mum aici neeneih copes bi 5 is og ae 
teens Kulpakt to ‘the Bournzani| to be about 2,000.—United Press s 3 AY a oe @ -, 
ridge. : ne ¥ fag a ane ma 75 F 

Favourable weather (yesterday Inter 0 t : Seen CIEE: : ee nt 29 
$ p r : Chicago,:-Dec.. 2! 
occer Vice-President, announced. i 


rove the Grrek air force its 
chance und it pounded guerrilla 
poriti:ng, and claimed to have 


S Shanghai, Dec. «80. onig ddiness ‘ta’ he: n in- 
A 16-man team will be sent cast tonight his. readiness bie head an phe 

te Hongkong in the first week dependent third. party R.: American ; 

aw tok [seis mah] politics ond his’ intention ‘to enter next 

colony, according to a decision November’s “presidential “election as 


of the Shanghai = Athlieti . pare Py 
Fedoratlon, an All-Chinene. cor: the new party's candidate. . 


yrabruary 10 has been tenta-)’ of the United States foreign policy, has 
interport match. — It waa -also been asked-to' form a third: party by 


[cr the Chinese Olympic soccer + eee 
team will be held from Janu- fluential ‘liberal group. 
ary 24 to February 1 with a ‘ Pte ra sath ‘ 
final tryout to be held in Hong. Meantime, as one indication of a): 
kong after the Chineso New) "er sie trading ihe shied nevty: Te 
Year in a game with South} an cinaunceaigin that ‘aie of the key 
Ching playera.—Reuter, men of the magazinc—New Republic 


Soccer Fixtures 


last year, has resigned, 


fixtures:—- ; ; 
Saturday Jan. 3. 
FIRST DIVISION — 
South China v, Pslice, C, ‘Hill’ 4- 
pm. Refi-al. Havelaor; Lines- 
menses Redman/Tsang King- 
hong. . 


Only $5.90 | 
oe 


election of President Truman. 


‘JEWELLERY — 


whigh "it 


AY, DECEMBER 31, 1947. 


ICHRISTMAS REGATTA 'M 


| Trevessa Trophy 


‘| course was set to ensure that the crulsors i 18th, Yellow (Lancaster) 


. [Me McKenslo’s cup as a Challenge Trophy 


Mr. Henry Wallace, former United States : 
n a brodd- . 


trolling body. Mr. Wallace, who ‘is:now the foremost critic 


decided that -a district tryout progressive ‘citizens of America, an in-. 


‘which .Mr. Wallace’ has edited 
nce he left Mr, Truman's cabinet 


In his speech’ over a national net- 
work’ Mr! Wallace announced flatly 
and. without qualification that © he 
would be a candidate, ruaning on 4 
platform whose main . planks would 
be “world peace”. and economic’ and 
social rights for he “common man.” 
i i 7 With the backing °of mumerout tr (Jane Btrellett) 0.61.10: Sed, Gambia I f Gi , ; 
The following are the week-end: Soccer “progressive” groups. and the Can- (Hlarciet Harvey) 0.82.85 ith, Tne 4 Ce tate tia). Goldenaue 

* munitt Party, Mr. Wate ¥ entrance Olarmares Bon 8 iy hese ; 

to “the « aldere Tower) 0.08103 i é 
i nectral political cobservern fo | Bui of ork ¥ (Bunty D-Arcy) 06800; Pree Oe) a ar Coes 
have ge its main result a wulsenneialy Ue Suseen oe epee LR. Cleland (10) E.T.. McMul- 


weakening of chances for the —Fe=| gond) 0.60.45 Oth, ‘Theseus Ill (Mrs. 
“United States military aid to Ching, | (Shiney Cantopher). 0.58.00; 11th, Com- 


‘PHO TOGKAPHY- 


oP Asta PHOTO SUP 
re cf, © 10,1ee House BL. “De 


“BLUKY WINDS [scr 


‘Went Behind: 


The: Curtaiiis’ 


“New York, Ded: 130. / 5 
Edward Swoency’s bed) in. , 


Drew Few Entries 
Another Christmas has come and gone, and with | firs. Th arding howsg SBHEMy + 
it another Christmas Beanie at-the Royal Sweoncy lecped from. the; - 
Hong Kong Yacht Club.: For many members | be4. ran, to: “oor, ppeped . 
it has been their last Regatta in Hong Kong |. 26 URL on ee 
for the present. To all those who are leaving Firemyn n° “nd, réscued” j..? 
in the New Year we wish “Good Sailing.” Bweenes'b  Cenates” pres i 
The three day Regatta: wan not |!n at lonet 2 out of 4 races, and ared to scave, .h / Bt 


i petitor with the best average wins. IL nockin:;,. opened a -"Yoor. 4 
biemed with particularly good salina | aro the reulla of the four raceat "| hero waa Kivcency oro 
.| FRIDAY. MORNING: Ist, London If cupboard.~-Assoclated, Press.. ° 
existent, or fluky to the extreme. (Mannta . J ; 
iw Busdell) 1.22.05; 2nd,’ Comma 
Nevertheless the whole programme | gore If (Chidell) 1.28.40; 8rd, Yellow 
was completed and all the trophies | (Marrett) 1.£6.40; ath, Gamble I (Gracy) Sere ae he 
were wellewon and well deserved. | £28.60; 8th, Theseus T (Goodhart) 1.20.05; although the Services had sryat hopes \ 
The prize-giving wae held at the ath, Btoneeuittars V (Meyrick) 1.80.45 :"74h, year nt Wes began to fall on Bun ig 
clubhouse on Sunday.evening, when | Theseus ST (Locy) 1.82.60; €th, Adamant aa oom : 
Mrs, Ingram, wife of Captain Ingram |! (Byng) 1.88.40; Oth, Tyne I (Min Pp.) _ SERVICES rune ace a 
Loaeby) 1.25.00; 10th, Adamant V1 2 
R.N. of HLM.S, Adamant, handed the | (Davies) 1.05.20; 11th, Stonccutten Vv Sunday, Dec, 38, AM. 
and Challenge Trophies to the | crtackett Bon) 1.41.00; Commodore Diaquaiifud, Theseu. 11" (Chidell ‘C*) 
‘ (Mallorie) DNF. | 1.67.88 5 let, tendon nag «Cooke "Oy jaraes cats 
‘ _ FRIDAY AFTERNOON: (1 Th 2nd, Comus (Hackett °C) 159.485 e 
___ TREVESBA TROPHY It Avlon Faller) 0.06102 Endy Londen { Atamant TV (farris 0) 2.00403 Atty 
<-Thla rece as last year, was ormanised [11 (Strang) 0.80.50; ard, London I (Dar. | Cnmbla, (Goodhart ‘By 2.08801 fh. Goes © 
ty Mr. Beechinu. Fett) LOL1T; 4th Btonecutters 1 (Meyrien.| "0c (Meyrick ay Sg.oeabr sth. Londen 1 
“It fa dleappointing that so few entrée | Mien, Meyrick) 1.01.90; 6th, Tyne II (Wil. inate (8) aor t "th, | Theesus 3- 
4 boate—were forthcaming compared with | lame Crumpett) 1.01.45; éth, Adamant J (Tonbde’ 'B') 2.02.00; 8th, “Marcon (Mane: 
the much bigger turn out last year. Tho J ‘Ith, Thesrue 1| 12. C’) 2.08.40; Oth, Vid (Mack ‘B') |”, 
: A 2.03.407;J0th, Theseus It’ (Sedgwick ‘C'> 


t 


prize 
winn 


two leading boats had a ureat race and th, Adamant Ht 
there ‘was a close finish. (Manning Dusbell) 0: Oth Cossark 4 
Results t—- (Mallorie Mra, Mallorte) 1.04.45; 10th, 


, [Anchises (Blue Funne!t Line) ...+++ 11 Bto ra ‘ ary 
) nacutters IT (Mitchell) 1.06055 111%, cs) pog.ag 


Eastern Saga (Indo-China) ... os &] Adamant VIO (Gi ichol * . 
Raster Game (Ind On) a Goathe | ee ace (Wordly Testy: Tamm | Bars: “C), 207. 
the coxewain of Anchlees'@bont, whilst the | Theseus If (Dyna) 1.09.28 (Miteboll 'B') 
‘Tre trophy ftvelf Je handed to the| cutters V (Davies Edwards) 


Shipe Hing Konz Agents for safe keeping | Stonecutters If (Smith Wa 
until next year, : SATURDAY AFTERNOON: 

: i (Meyrick), 1.20.80; &nd,. Duke of York 1]; . 
Te cater CUTER ccc on | HAT) LALAOG Bed, eweoe IIL (Rae-| ie Corbett OD AUST 

Frid ‘d Bunday,. bi f burn) 104,00; 4th, Tyne I (Hones | yoy catrang “O") 

Me eee the Meh gry on: FHGAT, | ee ie eat ah Wtkineon 3) 2.20.80 7150, Beoneew 
Invposetble with, the aMeting driited down | Hiatt, (Richardson) 1.28451 7th, Adement |j1 (a rea’) 200804: 20th, Adinant IY 
when the & erulaers entering drifted dom | {TY (Caxtopher) 18.40: 6th, Ademant V1 Tae a) BILAUL “1th, “Gamba IL-(¢ 
power, ; Soe aad cicthe ‘coeeaeer AL tuicchteld 6 y B10 6th ‘Adaraune 100? 

ii eerys sat yeamrer reel 90.50 5 11th, ‘Btonecutters I ') 2.12.00; Black’ (Barrett °6')” 
course oF encure that the oral 05: 12h, Bedarwiek (Me / 'Regatiiy The Club 3861 Combined ses” .% 

if 


could return in tle for the eveninn’s! y gesq, 14 D (Litehtela "4 
. a Lg bhi ) 1.8 bs 
erate L5th, Comus (Gracey) 1.80.05; 16th, Gam. | PRESENTATION - 
Tho. course was to Kowloon Rocks, TH] bia TL (Gray) ‘1.40.08 ' Tho cups, trophies and cadh prises were = 
‘ ve gaa 40.08, . ; " ; 
tong Pee (oft Sheko) beck, the] 7 other boats ‘started but were disquall- Fe A ee abhi ei a0 


Yachts finlahcd as follows t— fied or did mov Onlsts 

‘Sat, Arik! (Hownam, Meek) Actual . ae pm. on’ Bonday evening by Mre.. In: 

ict’, BUNDAY ‘AETERNOON: 1at, London 1 time fhe two caplet fairs} 
H 


.00, corrected time 4, (Gracey): 2nd, Theaaus I (Mise Cant ‘ is ‘ 
50, 440.60; Prd | ober) i rd, Suunecutters IV (Corbett): pried for duting * the Pia 
+ 4th, Hare} gh tyne IT (Goodbert) ; Bth, ety 
binger (Lapper) 6.84.20, 6.7.10; Terne! poy atus Phillips); 6th, Comus 
(Mm) 3.85.10, 6.84.9. . wick); 7th,’ V.3.(Mannidg) ; 81h, Gambia 
Disqualified after, foullng: Haybinger. Er (yitehfeld); Theatus I Yngham) ; 
: fo SiR: ; 10th, Alert’ (Burd); 11th, “Londo 3 
. The 6 Jublloes had. decided to'race three i ts ate aaa ie iia |" : 
F « using); 14h, V.2 ‘ ity 
tines ‘during the Regatta and to preacnt (Grace) 116th, Duby of York 1 (Mldzely): Dragons How ballalne At the Co 
+ : 16th, @hirgon' (Dronimopd)., eel hes pane 
Unfortunately -all three races tumed} © Ms siatted bat ld not Aniehel ye Next WEE ; : 
oe Nee mas Met ra | aw amamae csr, won| aa Ss er em 
Hardy, Marvack, Bulton) .28i5g tnd, | Sure/Cdr. Dareett RN. with two ante: the. ne 'ballgoor, on ‘Keltet “Telypd. ria 
M32 (R, Beeching, V. Beechitz, ble Becia Btrang, and Wt/Cde, Meyrick | gteriekors’ new. motor’ yacht “Bt v1 
‘Veochtng) 8.8819; ard, HJ (R.. Smith) * Hesse hav: Beery bifeted to asaleb tn, Srey) nbd: 
S848; 4th, HJ1 (Mlddfod{teh) 41.695 TRAM RACH & COMBINED BERVICES| and frods Kelle, and to addition 
Gth, HLI.5 (F. Crosbie) 8.46.80; 6th, 11-J. The annual Christmas event was won rival ana phe ate 


(MacKensje) 3.53.16. for the d time by the Club team, 
’ eo e 
{R. Beeching, Wii Beechies, Abercrombie. ; H 


SATURDAY AFTERNOON: Iet,: 304.6 
Conwalker) 1 
an : , 


(Crosbie) 1.61.25; tnd, HJ.3 (RB. Brith) 
“SUNDAY MORNING: It, HJ] 
one eee 
| Thé.following is the draw for the Fit 


td the best averago. 


148,005 Br4; MSL - (DD. Mbddlediteh) Pj = = 
144.20; 4th, HJ8 (D, Kelthffardy, J.p : 
Kelth-Hardy, Wilmott) 148.101 6th, HJ D i 

| (detth) 4.26.30; 2nd, Hah (Croable) 
4.49.60 |. HSA (Middleditch) 4.88.40: 


4th, (Helth-Hardy) 4.96.40; bth,’ 
HEI (MacKensley 6.49.10; HI.2 (Be 


ching) Ne. ; 
‘The Challeng Cup was presented to Mr. 
RE Bmlth wh , & alightly , better 
arerace than’ the runner-up, ‘Mr, Crosbie, 
{ni the throp events. : : 
“ " LADIES. RACE ; 
Teolve ladios raced‘an Saturday morn> 
ing—and they had the best race of the 
seggtla as the wind atrongthened for them | og 
and made s thrilling race. Miss Pat 
Loseby won the small cup for this race. 
Ladtes Dinghy Ay — ‘ Marden (18) 
LADIES DINGHY RACE: It, ‘Theseus T v. -Dodwell ° 
11 (Miss P. Loseby) 0.80.58: 2nd, Gamble | Stewart (18). J.B. Kite (24) -v. | Mundy 
Ja 


“Bonews) 0.6240; bth, Btonece’ | Gibb Livingston & Co, “Ltd, B, 


66.013. 8th, Commodore X (Darbara Too- 


lon -(2)- : 

Batayichy. 0.88.80; 10th, Btonecutters V{ ‘Imperial ‘Chentical ‘Industries /- 
" Mateos tie Ltd. H3.D, Lowe (20) KR, quick 

(24): v, Hong ‘Kong Electric Co. 


ia . ', @ Unquestionably Nylor Devons v, R.A.F., Sookunpoo, 4 as well as to Turkey: and Greece, | modore 11 (C. Ballantine) 069.06; 12th, 
pm. Refi-—K.K. Ip; Linesment. tings. | was attacked by Mr..Wallace-os con ee Ltd. W. ‘Stoker’ (20) TE. Boy- 
S | did V, I Fe O di : —A, Rebelro/L. Harris. — « . liributing tothe skyrocketing prices cott .(18),-. (pees, 
prenaia Yaiue or rdinary K.M. Bus v. Navy, Pollee, 4, p.m |Footbalt: R uo the United State, °°. 
’ \ . Ref.i—J, Ward; Linesmen:—R.' |e held en Monday,, 6th Januaty, Mc. Wallace said: “The. American}; 
int Dail Use Xavier/B, Xavier. 1940 in the HAC. “Football Aseo.| people ‘read. of the fantastic ‘appro-| Two Whaler. sailing races) were 
. iy : y _ [Club v. St. Joseph's, Club, ,4 p.m. {ciation’s office at. 8.00 ‘p.m.” + > priations: being made fot vmllitary | one/on Saturday ‘afternoon for Tatings, 
F ‘ ag : Ref.:—J.G, Padiey, Lineamen:—| +. St. Josephs’. Team adventures: in’ Greece, Turkey and [ard an open, rice on Bunday morning! 
, Keep a few pairs of these Nylons for: 8. ¥, Kwok/J. Crawford. | “ay. goltowing will ar * 1 Chine—and billions , for aimgaments [Tbe Bundy mornin race war » “eres can 
woe AGS et Bo ‘ollowing= will :re; resent | tere at home. Slowly .it dawns on us Whiler race—ert selling and, part pul!- Dunnett (13 ( 
ety a1 « . Joseph's iy :their First Divialon be 7 ft ing., Results. * " i , | Swire C.C. Roberta (18) FD. 
3 @ Hiking : 28 R F football ‘on Club . ground that: those Rewapaper head! nes have! BargRDAY RACE: it, Comus ‘I | Hunter -(8).-.- ewes 
fe @ ‘Wet Da : ’ 4 p.me—J. Brows; stepped ‘into our veryday:; Niven | 147.30; Md, Bleck: Gwan 1 49L60; a4] Colonial” Legal Service E.ii 
: > ys eat, ee geen ea eee ee oe eo otacar Lenni Sate (ee), a 
wig ‘ oc B 5 . es a e: ‘the . wo: Constance 1,1 @th, Cossack ey . * 
4, ns e@ Rough Wear. . UMHS rendy, for the next wn wvithout BAYS th, heck Pesagg it 2.07.48, : po F. i ates Bapresy to, 5 
ae : ay an e @ Odd Occasions ing for Sin clothing ad: housing.” CRASH (18), : Meas 
‘ se “ : . 2 : 7 a 
‘Also now offering: ees 
‘OxBy 


one FP ‘i rs Tbs 5 ASHEN OPEC R fi 
‘ Vy 2 : ' f 4 | frown: ety in 2932(F, ba eae 100 | s : 
inpdo ie ars 8 owes Wyte pablleana «atid fel Ceetaeh Aug ger ‘teal ‘Lohan tie Mavsp whe Gresnpoidt “Polo | Club: of 


Condos) .0.88.90;: tnd) “London I, Matey, Ne! fots, 
? "tani Ard, Mamint Vis Australia, “dour goal ap three, 
Rtsh.: (Adaipent) diy, Bye f before: a crowd - 0! 00. at 
Cosaeoray 1080) Sub, Marsan, Mar} Cie % 4 Par ‘ont Sunde 


